HIGHER GRADE
1890
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write an essay of two or three pages on one of the following subjects: The influence of different professions on character. The history of novel-writing in England. The respective advantages of classical and of mathematical studies. The effects of commercial prosperity on a nation.
2. Give the derivations of the following words: Custom, Feeble, Talkative, Venison, Fancy, Umpire, Doff, Asterisk, Daisy, Perhaps, Farthing, Disease, Mathematics, Arrive.
3. What remains of inflexion have we in substantives and verbs? What do you know of the origin of these inflexions?
4. What did our language gain, and what did it lose, by the Norman Conquest?
5. What do you know of the introduction of printing into England, and of its effects on literature?
6. Describe any play by Shakespeare, or any poem by Milton, that you have read.
7. Give some account of the works of any two writers who were living (a) in the reign of Richard II (2); (b) in the reign of James IV (4) of Scotland; (c) in the year of the Spanish Armada; (d) in the reign of Queen Anne; (e) in the year of the battle of Waterloo.
8. Write a full account of any poem that you know by Burns, or Scott, or Tennyson, and show how it illustrates the qualities of the writer’s genius.
9. Analyse the following, explaining the principles upon which you base your analysis: But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might Of joy in minds that can no further go, As high as we have mounted in delight In our dejection do we sink as low, To me that morning did it happen so; And fears and fancies thick upon me came, Dim sadness and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor could name.
10. Write a short account of the life and work of King Alfred.
11. "Feudalism took firmer root in Scotland than it ever did in England." Explain and comment on this statement.
12. What do you know of Domesday Book, the Constitutions of Clarendon, and the provisions of Magna Charta?
13. Sketch the policy of Edward I (1) towards Scotland and Wales.
14. What were the permanent effects of the Wars of the Roses?
15. Describe the policy of Queen Elizabeth in Ecclesiastical matters.
16. Explain the main difficulties which Cromwell had to meet in carrying on the government of the Commonwealth.
17. What were the most important events in the history of Scotland during the reign of Charles II (2)?
18. What do you know of the Toleration Act, the rise of the Wesleyan movement, and the causes of the fall of Walpole?
19. Write an account and estimate of the policy of the younger Pitt.
20. What additions have been made to the British Empire since the Accession of Queen Victoria?
21. Indicate on an outline map the racial differences of the inhabitants of Great Britain and Ireland, including the main islands.
22. Name five of the chief towns either in the Southern Lowlands of Scotland, or in Yorkshire and Lancashire, and mention the chief industries of each.
23. In what parts of Great Britain and Ireland are wheat, oats, hops, potatoes, and apples respectively most cultivated?
24. Draw a map of South Africa, indicating the physical features and political divisions; or draw a map of the larger West Indian islands, indicating the British possessions and their commercial importance.
25. Draw a map of Central Europe, showing the distribution of the mountain ranges and the plains, and pointing out some political effects of this distribution.

HONOURS
1890
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Show the influence of social, political, and religious conditions upon literature in the time of Chaucer or Shakespeare or Pope or Byron.
2. Is it the fact, and, if so, how would you account for the fact, that our prose literature reached great excellence more slowly than our poetry?
3. At what periods of our history have drama, satire, and history respectively flourished most? Give an account and estimate of any satirist or any historian.
4. Describe fully any one of Shakespeare’s most famous characters.
5. Compare as writers either Chaucer and Spenser, or Milton and Bunyan, or Johnson and Goldsmith, or Burns and Wordsworth, or Scott and Dickens.
6. What do you know of the scientific achievements of any two of the following: Bacon, Newton, Darwin?
7. Translate into modern English: Efne ða se apostol thas lare sprecende wæs, ða bar sum widewe hire suna lie to bebyrgenne, se hæfde gewifod ðrittigum nihtum ær. Seo dreorige modor ða samod mid ðam licmannum wepende hi astrehte ad ðæs halgan apostoles fotum, biddende fæst he hire sunu on Godes naman arærde, swa swa he dyde ðære synderwan Drusianam. Johannes ofhreow ðære meder and ðara licmanna dreorignysse, and astrehte his lichaman to eorðan on langsumum gebede, and ða set nextan aras, and eft upahafenum handum langlice bæd.
8. Decline the italicised substantives.
9. Translate into Anglo-Saxon: (a) When it was evening, the lord of the vineyard said to his officer, Call the labourers and give them their rewards. (b) A hundred men, coming in three ships, lost two of the ships, and sold themselves to the king, who protected them.
10. Translate into modern English as literally as possible: (a) Thus com lo! Engelond into Normandies bond. And the Normans ne couthe speke tho bote hor owe speche, And speke French as hii dude atom, and hor children dude also teche. So that heiemen of this loud, that of hor blod come, Holdeth alle thulke speche that hii of hom nome. Vor bote a man conne Fronss, me telth of him lute; Ac lowe men holdeth to Engliss, & to hor owe speche yute. (b) Of mouth of childer and soukand Made thou lof in ilka land, For thi faes, that thou fordo The faa, the wreker him unto. For I sal se thine hevenes hegh, And werkes of thine fingres slegh; The mone and sternes mani ma, That thou grounded to be swa.
11. Show from these two passages in what dialect each is written; and trace the history of the three main dialects after (1350).
12. In what sense can English be called a mixed language?

SECOND GRADE
1890
ENGLISH
PAPER: 3
1. Write out and punctuate the passage read for dictation.
2. Paraphrase the following: "Hark! ’tis the twanging horn! O’er yonder bridge, That with its wearisome but needful length Bestrides the wintry flood, in which the moon Sees her unwrinkled face reflected bright, He comes, the herald of a noisy world, With spattered boots, strapped waist and frozen locks, News from all nations lumbering at his back. True to his charge, the close-packed load behind, Yet careless what he brings, his one concern Is to conduct it to the destined inn, And, having dropped the expected bag, pass on."
3. Analyse the first five lines of the above quotation.
4. Point out any faults in the following sentences, and correct them: (a) Passing up the stairs, a rapid consultation was held. (b) He met the very person whom he thought was least likely to be present. (c) Philosophy never has and never can be a popular subject. (d) If we examine this sentence, we will find it faulty. (e) Nothing that remains in any part of the world is so grand as the pyramids.
5. Parse the italicised words in the following sentences: (a) My father! Methinks I see my father. (b) Nobody knows it but you. (c) It is easy to see that. (d) Seeing is believing. (e) Cut me a slice. (f) We will make him a corporal, if you please. (g) He is a friend of mine.
6. Explain, with an example of each, the meaning of the terms: intransitive verb, auxiliary verb, subjunctive mood, compound noun, compound sentence, noun of multitude, indefinite pronoun.
7. Give some instances of Romance suffixes added to Teutonic roots, and of Teutonic suffixes added to Romance roots. Explain the force of each suffix.
8. Give the derivations of the following words: Madam, Twenty, Provost, Biscuit, Ancestor, Bishopric, Pilgrim, Hotel, Panorama, Strange, Planet.
9. Name, with dates, the authors of the following works: The Fairy Queen, Macbeth, The Pilgrim’s Progress, The Cotter’s Saturday Night, The Ancient Mariner. Give an account of any one of these works.
10. Name, with a brief account of one of the works of each, either (a) two poets of the fourteenth century; (b) two dramatists or two theologians of the sixteenth century; (c) two poets or two historians of the seventeenth century; (d) two satirists or two novelists of the eighteenth century; (e) two poets or two men of science of the nineteenth century.
11. What do you know of the conversion of the English to Christianity?
12. Write a sketch of the relations between the kings and the barons during the reigns either of the Norman or of the Plantagenet kings.
13. Explain the grounds of the quarrel between Henry II (2) and Becket.
14. Write a sketch of the reign either of James I (1) of Scotland or of James IV (4).
15. How did the Reformation in Scotland differ from the Reformation in England?
16. What were the causes of the hostility of England and Spain in the reign of Elizabeth? What do you know of Drake and Raleigh?
17. What were the chief causes of dispute which brought on the Great Rebellion?
18. What do you know of the Cabal, the Exclusion Bill, the Trial of the Seven Bishops, the battle of Killiecrankie?
19. Write a sketch either of Clive’s career in India, or of the War of American Independence.
20. What do you know of the Irish Rebellion of (1798), the Abolition of the Slave Trade, and the Holy Alliance?
21. Draw a straight line from Perth to Sheffield, or from Newcastle to Bristol, and show near what important towns, and across what rivers and mountain-ranges, the line would pass.
22. In what parts of Great Britain are lead, salt, and slate respectively found in the greatest abundance?
23. From what countries, and to what ports, do we chiefly import tea, sugar, wheat, and timber?
24. Name the chief possessions of Great Britain in North America, with the dates and main circumstances of their acquisition.
25. Draw an outline map of Ireland, or of England south of the Mersey, indicating the districts most thickly, and those most thinly, populated.
