LOWER GRADE
(1892)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write out and punctuate the passage read for dictation.
2. Paraphrase the following lines.
3. Analyse the first four lines of the above quotation.
4. Which of the words in the passage quoted in Question 2 are of classical origin? Give the derivations of five of these words. Point out native suffixes in any words in the passage.
5. Parse the italicised words in the following sentences.
6. Distinguish, with a few illustrations, the principal ways of marking gender in English nouns.
7. Explain the meaning of the terms strong verb, impersonal verb, mood, tense. How does the clause *If I were guilty* differ in meaning from the clause *If I was guilty*? How does the sentence *His influence increased year by year* differ in meaning from the sentence *His influence has increased year by year*?
8. Give some account of the state of English literature during one of the following periods.
9. Describe two famous English works from the following groups.
10. Point out, and correct, any faults in the following sentences.
11. Write a short life of Alfred the Great, or of Ethelred the Unready, showing the effects upon the history of England of the policy pursued by either.
12. Give an account of the various risings that William the Conqueror had to suppress, with special reference to the part played by Malcolm Canmore. When did the Norman Baronage cease to be troublesome to the English Kings?
13. Sketch the course of events that led to the granting of the Great Charter, and enumerate some of its most important provisions.
14. Sketch the history of Scotland from the death of Alexander III. down to the defeat of Wallace.
15. Give a brief account of each of the following: The Black Death, the Statute of Labourers, the Statute of Præmunire, the Peasants’ Revolt, the Merciless Parliament.
16. Explain the various circumstances that brought about the Wars of the Roses, and trace the history of the wars down to the death of Henry VI.
17. “The Tudors were all popular when they obtained the crown, and unpopular before they died.” How far is this true?
18. Give some account of the reign of James VI. of Scotland before his accession to the English throne, and of the various subjects on which he quarrelled with the English Parliament.
19. What were the causes of the War of the Spanish Succession? Narrate the history of the campaign of Blenheim, or of the capture of Gibraltar, and give some account of the terms on which peace was made.
20. Write a short life of the younger Pitt, explaining the circumstances under which he became Prime Minister, his domestic policy, his views of the French Revolution, his Irish policy, and the causes of his resignation.
21. A vessel sails from Aberdeen to Hull, calling at all the chief ports. What kind of cargo might she hope to pick up at each, and what headlands or capes might she sight?
22. Name the principal centres of deep-sea fishery in Scotland, and the places in Scotland to which you would send for cotton goods, iron, whisky, coal, steamers, tweed, wheat.
23. Draw a map of England south of the Severn and west of Wiltshire, or a map of the four northern counties of England.
24. Draw a map of Spain, showing the chief physical features, or a map of the Balkan Peninsula, showing the political divisions.
25. Give some account of the discovery of Australia, of the difficulties encountered in exploring the interior of it, of any animals or plants peculiar to it, and of its political divisions and government.

HIGHER GRADE
(1892)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write an essay of two or three pages on one of the following subjects.
2. State, and exemplify, the correct usage of *shall* and *will*. Are the following usages good English, and, if so, why?
3. Illustrate the statements that, in the English Alphabet, one letter represents different sounds, and one sound is represented by different letters.
4. State the origin of any three of the following words, and the derivation of any five.
5. What facts in the history of the English language can you illustrate from the existence of the doublets *ward* and *guard*, *evil* and *ill*, *poor* and *pauper*, *church* and *kirk*?
6. When, and by whom, were the following works written? Give a short account of any two of these works.
7. What was the general character of English Literature at the time when *The Pilgrim’s Progress* was written? Why is it called an allegory? Can you compare it with the *Fairy Queen*?
8. Describe in full one of Chaucer’s Canterbury Pilgrims, or one of Shakespeare’s heroines, or one of Scott’s humorous characters.
9. Point out, and correct, any faults in the following sentences.
10. Paraphrase the following passage so as to exhibit the full meaning, and analyse the four lines beginning “For what are men.”
11. Give an account of the reign of Edward the Confessor, with special reference to the position and policy of Earl Godwin and his sons.
12. Name any instances, between 1066 and 1400, in which the English crown did not pass from father to eldest son, and explain the reasons in each case.
13. Give an account of the parentage, relationships, and education of David I. Describe his policy, and its results to Scotland.
14. Write a short life of Simon de Montfort.
15. What were the causes that led to the outbreak of the Hundred Years’ War between England and France? Account for its long duration, and estimate its effect upon each of the two countries. In what position did they stand at the close of the reign of Edward III.?
16. Sketch the history of the Reformation in Scotland down to the death of Mary of Guise, and contrast its origin and final settlement with the corresponding movement in England.
17. What were the most important measures of the Long Parliament down to the beginning of the Civil War? How did the Long Parliament come to an end?
18. Write short notes on the Five Mile Act, Test Act, Habeas Corpus Act, Toleration Act, Mutiny Act, Claim of Right and Act of Settlement, explaining the circumstances under which they were severally passed.
19. Sketch the political life of Sir Robert Walpole, describing his character and policy as shown both in opposition and during his ministry.
20. Describe the political and social condition of Great Britain in the period immediately after Waterloo. What do you know of Brougham, Huskisson, Canning, Grey, O’Connell?
21. From what ports in Great Britain would you start for Hamburg, Riga, Boulogne, Marseilles, Bergen, Madeira, Malta, Valparaiso, New York, Melbourne, Montreal, Trinidad? About how long would the voyage by steamer take in each case?
22. Draw a map of Ireland, and show the position of the chief mountain ranges, rivers, and lakes. Name the various routes to England and Scotland, and the chief articles exported.
23. Draw a map of the Basin of the Forth or the Trent, showing the towns and indicating their historical or commercial importance.
24. Describe the main physical divisions of India, and the principal products of each; add short notes on the Monsoons, the North-West Frontier, and Caste.
25. What are the physical and geographical conditions that determine the temperature, rainfall, general climate, and productiveness of any place? Give examples.

HONOURS
(1892)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Illustrate the statement that poetry flourished in Scotland at the close of the fifteenth century and the opening of the sixteenth. Can you suggest any reasons for the fact?
2. What kinds of literature flourished most in England between 1580 and 1620? Write an account of any Book of the *Fairy Queen*, or of any tragedy by Shakespeare, or of any work by Bacon.
3. Contrast the poetry of Milton with that of Pope, or the spirit of Addison’s writings with the spirit of Swift’s, or the poetry of Wordsworth with that of Scott, or the style of Macaulay with that of Carlyle.
4. Describe any two of the following characters.
5. How does *Robinson Crusoe* seem to you to differ most from the tales of adventure written at the present time?
6. Take any period of fifty years since the Norman Conquest, and discuss with reference to it the statement that the literature of an age reflects the political and social condition of the age.
7. Translate into English the given Old English passage.
8. Decline three of the nouns italicised in the above passage; and give the infinitive, 3rd person singular present indicative, plural preterite indicative, and past participle of each of the italicised verbs.
9. In what dialects are the following passages written? State, in detail, the reasons for your answer. From what dialect was modern English developed?
10. Sketch the history of the influx of French words into English from the Norman Conquest to the time of Chaucer. What truth is there in the statement that Chaucer “corrupted” the English language by a free introduction of French words?
11. Discuss the question whether English has, on the whole, gained or lost by becoming, as compared with Anglo-Saxon, an un-inflected language.

LOWER GRADE
(1892)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Write a short life of Alfred the Great, or of Ethelred the Unready, showing the effects upon the history of England of the policy pursued by either.
2. Give an account of the various risings that William the Conqueror had to suppress, with special reference to the part played by Malcolm Canmore. When did the Norman Baronage cease to be troublesome to the English Kings?
3. Sketch the course of events that led to the granting of the Great Charter, and enumerate some of its most important provisions.
4. Sketch the history of Scotland from the death of Alexander III. down to the defeat of Wallace.
5. Give a brief account of each of the following: The Black Death, the Statute of Labourers, the Statute of Præmunire, the Peasants’ Revolt, the Merciless Parliament.
6. Explain the various circumstances that brought about the Wars of the Roses, and trace the history of the wars down to the death of Henry VI.
7. “The Tudors were all popular when they obtained the crown, and unpopular before they died.” How far is this true?
8. Give some account of the reign of James VI. of Scotland before his accession to the English throne, and of the various subjects on which he quarrelled with the English Parliament.
9. What were the causes of the War of the Spanish Succession? Narrate the history of the campaign of Blenheim, or of the capture of Gibraltar, and give some account of the terms on which peace was made.
10. Write a short life of the younger Pitt, explaining the circumstances under which he became Prime Minister, his domestic policy, his views of the French Revolution, his Irish policy, and the causes of his resignation.

HIGHER GRADE
(1892)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Give an account of the reign of Edward the Confessor, with special reference to the position and policy of Earl Godwin and his sons.
2. Name any instances, between 1066 and 1400, in which the English crown did not pass from father to eldest son, and explain the reasons in each case.
3. Give an account of the parentage, relationships, and education of David I. Describe his policy, and its results to Scotland.
4. Write a short life of Simon de Montfort.
5. What were the causes that led to the outbreak of the Hundred Years’ War between England and France? Account for its long duration, and estimate its effect upon each of the two countries. In what position did they stand at the close of the reign of Edward III.?
6. Sketch the history of the Reformation in Scotland down to the death of Mary of Guise, and contrast its origin and final settlement with the corresponding movement in England.
7. What were the most important measures of the Long Parliament down to the beginning of the Civil War? How did the Long Parliament come to an end?
8. Write short notes on the Five Mile Act, Test Act, Habeas Corpus Act, Toleration Act, Mutiny Act, Claim of Right and Act of Settlement, explaining the circumstances under which they were severally passed.
9. Sketch the political life of Sir Robert Walpole, describing his character and policy as shown both in opposition and during his ministry.
10. Describe the political and social condition of Great Britain in the period immediately after Waterloo. What do you know of Brougham, Huskisson, Canning, Grey, O’Connell?

LOWER GRADE
(1892)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. A vessel sails from Aberdeen to Hull, calling at all the chief ports. What kind of cargo might she hope to pick up at each, and what headlands or capes might she sight?
2. Name the principal centres of deep-sea fishery in Scotland, and the places in Scotland to which you would send for cotton goods, iron, whisky, coal, steamers, tweed, wheat.
3. Draw a map of England south of the Severn and west of Wiltshire, or a map of the four northern counties of England.
4. Draw a map of Spain, showing the chief physical features, or a map of the Balkan Peninsula, showing the political divisions.
5. Give some account of the discovery of Australia, of the difficulties encountered in exploring the interior of it, of any animals or plants peculiar to it, and of its political divisions and government.

HIGHER GRADE
(1892)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. From what ports in Great Britain would you start for Hamburg, Riga, Boulogne, Marseilles, Bergen, Madeira, Malta, Valparaiso, New York, Melbourne, Montreal, Trinidad? About how long would the voyage by steamer take in each case?
2. Draw a map of Ireland, and show the position of the chief mountain ranges, rivers, and lakes. Name the various routes to England and Scotland, and the chief articles exported.
3. Draw a map of the Basin of the Forth or the Trent, showing the towns and indicating their historical or commercial importance.
4. Describe the main physical divisions of India, and the principal products of each; add short notes on the Monsoons, the North-West Frontier, and Caste.
5. What are the physical and geographical conditions that determine the temperature, rainfall, general climate, and productiveness of any place? Give examples.