LOWER GRADE
1901
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write out, and punctuate, the passage read for dictation.
2. Write an essay, of about two pages, on one of the following subjects: A comparison of the Navy and the Army as careers. A character sketch of an acquaintance.
3. Paraphrase the following lines, so as to bring out their full meaning: Youth repairs His wasted spirits quickly, by long toil Incurring short fatigue ; and though our years, As life declines, speed rapidly away, And not a year but pilfers as he goes Some youthful grace that age would gladly keep, The elastic spring of an unwearied foot, That mounts the style with ease, or leaps the fence, That play of lungs, inhaling and again Respiring freely the fresh air, that makes Swift pace or steep ascent no toil to me, Mine have not pilfered yet; nor yet impaired My relish of fair prospect: scenes that soothed Or charmed me young, no longer young, I find Still soothing and of power to charm me still.
4. Parse the six words italicised in the above passage. Name and describe the metre in which the above passage is written, and mention any two English poems written in this metre.
5. Make a general analysis of the lines in Question 3 from "and though our years" to "Mine have not pilfered yet." Distinguish between the meanings of gratitude and gratuity, compliment and complement; and illustrate the meaning of each word by a sentence in which it is used.
6. Give the derivation of five of the following words, and show how each has acquired its present meaning: candid, extravagant, recreation, influence, lunatic, cynical, tantalise, rival, corroborate, vulgar.
7. Point out the faults in the following sentences. Explain why you consider them faults, and re-write each sentence in an improved form: The wise man is happy when he gains his own approbation, the fool other people’s. You are in the morning of life, and that is the season of enjoyment. Having examined the spot of the tragedy, the body was removed. Her hand has been so severely injured, that unless she has her forefinger amputated she will entirely lose the use of it. Socrates, who had been at one time a diligent scientific observer, then turned his back upon Nature in order to concentrate it upon Man.
8. Name, with mention of their authors, any five poems that refer to famous persons or events in British history. Give a short description, if you can with quotations, of two of the poems you mention.

HIGHER GRADE
1901
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write an essay, of about two pages, on one of the following subjects: The conditions of modern civilization, as favourable or deleterious to health. The relative value of Classics and of Modern Languages in a school curriculum.
2. Paraphrase the following lines, so as to bring out their full meaning: When I have borne in memory what has tamed Great Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart When men change swords for ledgers, and desert The student’s bower for gold, some fears unnamed I had, my Country—am I to be blamed? Now, when I think of thee, and what thou art, Verily, in the bottom of my heart, Of those unfilial fears I am ashamed. For dearly must we prize thee; we who find In thee a bulwark for the cause of men; And I by my affection was beguiled: What wonder if a Poet now and then, Among the many movements of his mind, Felt for thee as a lover or a child!
3. "The vocabulary of a language may be borrowed, but its grammar is its own." Explain these two statements, and illustrate from the above passage their application to English.
4. Make a general analysis of the following sentence: "By observing in their dedications what qualities our writers think it will be most pleasing to others to compliment them with, one may form some judgment which are most so to themselves, and in consequence, what sort of people they are." Parse the eight words italicized in the following sentence: "As we have but half an hour to-morrow, all to-morrow’s lessons but that on geography will be taken the day after."
5. Give the derivation of the following words, and show how each has acquired its present meaning: candid, extravagant, recreation, influence, lunatic, cynical, tantalize, rival, corroborate, vulgar.
6. Explain, and illustrate by an example, what is meant by each of the following terms: synonym, bathos, hybrid, tautology, hyperbole, heroic couplet, pastoral poem, archaism, alliteration, gerundial infinitive.
7. Point out the faults in the following sentences; explain why you consider them faults, and re-write each sentence in an improved form: Socrates, who was at one time a diligent scientific observer, then turned his back upon Nature in order to concentrate it upon Man. He said there were men in the parish who have been accustomed to go over the roads now closed from their earliest days. Her hand was so severely injured, that unless she has her forefinger amputated she will entirely lose the use of it. Some say that the Duke is dead, others that he is alive; for my part I believe neither. Have we an intuitive apprehension of the difference between right and wrong; and if not, how do we come by it?
8. Take each of the following subjects, and describe any poem, or passage from prose or verse, which treats of it, giving any quotations you can: childhood, death, patriotism, love of nature, country life.

HONOURS
1901
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Point out the characteristics of Chaucer’s genius, and illustrate them, as far as possible, from the Prologue.
2. Give some account of the Scottish poetry of the Fifteenth Century, showing in what respects it followed Chaucer, and in what respects it was original.
3. Compare the characteristics of Elizabethan prose with those of Eighteenth Century prose, and illustrate your answer by reference to examples of each.
4. "Prose and poetry in Shakespeare’s plays serve, as a rule, for distinct purposes." Examine this statement, with illustrations.
5. Describe and compare any two of Shakespeare’s, or of Scott’s, humorous creations.
6. Describe Milton’s character and ideals as they are shown in his early poems.
7. Give some account of the rise of the English novel in the Eighteenth Century, and show in what respects it differed from the prose fiction of previous centuries.
8. Compare shortly any two poems written in the Spenserian stanza, two in heroic couplet, and two in blank verse.
9. What is the significance of The Lyrical Ballads in English literary history? In what ways did it indicate a new departure in poetry?
10. Compare the two members of any one of the following groups: Spenser and Bunyan, Addison and Steele, Johnson and Goldsmith, Tennyson and Browning.
11. Write a short descriptive note on each of the following: Nonne Prestes Tale, Morte d'Arthur, Utopia, Tottels Miscellany, Areopagitka, Tale of a Tub, Old Mortality, Ode on a Grecian Urn.