LOWER GRADE
1902
ENGLISH
PAPER 1
1. Write out, and punctuate, the passage for dictation.
2. Write an essay on one of the following subjects: The advantages of Travel; Epitaphs.
3. Paraphrase the following lines so as to bring out their full meaning.
4. Show, by an examination of any three lines of the above passage, how it differs from prose.
5. Parse the five words italicised in question 3. Make a general analysis of the following.
6. Write ten short sentences, each containing one of the following words correctly used so as to bring out its full meaning: affect, sumptuous, universal, athwart, collusion, wherewith, mitigate, continuous, mutual, howsoever.
7. Point out the faults in the following sentences. Say why you consider them faults, and re-write each sentence in an improved form.
8. Name one famous literary work by each of the following writers, indicating the kind to which it belongs and the approximate date of its appearance: Keats, Pope, Hooker, Dryden, Browning, Jeremy Taylor, Cowper. Give a fuller description of any one of the above works.
9. Write a short account of any one of the following reigns or ministries with special regard to domestic changes and wars: Alfred the Great, Henry III., Edward III., Henry VIII., James I., Charles II., Walpole, George III., Palmerston.
10. Give some account of any four of the following to show their significance in British history: Caesar's Invasion of Britain, Celtic Christianity, Danegeld, Domesday Book, The Maid of Norway, The White Ship, The Crusades, Edward I.'s Invasion of Wales, The First English Parliament, The Poll-tax, Battle of Shrewsbury, Siege of Orleans, Perkin Warbeck, Act of Supremacy, Six Articles, The Smithfield Fires, Battle of Zutphen, Insurrection of Essex, Hampton Court Conference, The Policy of "Thorough," Root and Branch Bill, Instrument of Government, The Trial of the Seven Bishops, Battle of the Boyne, National Debt, The Rising of (1715), South Sea Bubble, Seven Years' War, Trial of Warren Hastings, Peninsular War, Siege of Lucknow, First Home Rule Bill.
11. Describe in detail any two routes from London to Japan, mentioning the principal places passed on the way.
12. Draw a map of Africa showing the possessions of the principal European Powers.
13. Describe from source to mouth the course of any four of the navigable rivers of Great Britain.
14. Say where ten of the following places are situated and mention anything for which each is remarkable: Cintra, Dongola, Klondyke, Nice, Formosa, Harrismith, Ferrara, Leyden, New Orleans, Missolonghi, Gothenburg, Ajaccio, Staffa, Poitiers, Ratisbon, Edgehill.

HIGHER GRADE
1902
ENGLISH
PAPER 1
1. Write an essay on one of the following subjects: The Growth of the British Empire; Gambling; The Inventions of the Future.
2. Paraphrase the following passage so as to bring out its full meaning.
3. Illustrate the statement "Metaphor lies hid in all language" from the above passage.
4. Take each of the following subjects and describe any passage in prose or verse which treats of it, giving any quotations you can: a sea fight, music, the love of fame, the rose, a dream.
5. Point out the faults in the following sentences. Say why you consider them faults, and re-write each sentence in an improved form.
6. Parse the words italicised in the following. Make a general analysis of the following sentence.
7. Say what you know of the derivation and history of five of the following words: bedlam, dainty, handiwork, envy, feat, nickname, buxom, whole, conceited, animosity, minster, ajar, nostril, weird, sovereign, children.
8. Give a brief account of four of the following works: Marmion, The Lady of Shalott, The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, The Shepherd's Calendar, The Dunciad, Christabel, Adonais, Lycidas, Utopia, The Eve of St. Agnes, The Ballad of Sir Patrick Spens.
9. Give some account of any one of the principal characters in Shakespeare's tragedies, describing exactly the part played in the plot.

HONOURS
1902
ENGLISH
PAPER 2
1. Illustrate from Chaucer's work his minute observation of personal appearance and character.
2. Compare Malory's Morte D'Arthur and Tennyson's Idylls of the King, showing how each reflects the characteristics of the age in which it was written.
3. What part was taken in the Revival of Learning by Sir Thomas More, Erasmus, John Colet, and Bishop Fisher?
4. Explain the metrical construction of the Sonnet, and illustrate your answer by examining any well-known example.
5. Discuss the criticism: "In narration Shakespeare affects a disproportionate pomp of diction and a wearisome train of circumlocution."
6. Briefly describe one example of each of the following types of character as portrayed by Shakespeare: The man of action; The professional fool; The affected courtier.
7. Compare the prose writing of Bacon, Sir Thomas Browne, or Milton with that of Bunyan, Swift, or Defoe.
8. Give some account of the rise of the periodical Essay in the Eighteenth Century.
9. What do you understand by the Classical style in English poetry? Give examples.
10. Compare any two lyrics of the Nineteenth Century with any two of the Sixteenth.
11. Write short descriptive notes on six of the following: The Man of Law's Tale, The Vision of William Concerning Piers the Ploughman, Tyndale's New Testament, The Dance of the Seven Deadly Sins, The History of the World, Mother Hubbard's Tale, The Anatomy of Melancholy, MacFlecknoe, The Rape of the Lock, The Vanity of Human Wishes, She Stoops to Conquer, Humphry Clinker, Michael, Ode to Autumn, Redgauntlet, A Dream of Fair Women, Esmond, David Copperfield.
12. Give an account of any two English poems which have the form of a dramatic monologue.