Lower Grade
1908
ENGLISH
1
1. Write out, and punctuate, the passage for dictation.
2. Write a composition of about two pages on one of the following subjects: (a) Describe a football, cricket, or hockey match first from the point of view of a player, then from the point of view of a bystander. (b) Imagine yourself on holiday in a rather remote part of Scotland; write to a school friend, describing the locality, telling how you have spent your time, and finally inviting him (or her) to join you. Give precise instructions as to the route. (c) A poor girl, who played children’s parts in a theatre, one night received a guinea from the treasurer in mistake for half-a-guinea, which was her weekly wage. She started off with it, repented, and took it back to the treasurer. Tell this story more fully and dramatically, as you would tell it to a younger brother or sister; conclude it as you please, describing the interview between the girl and the treasurer as you imagine it.
3. Read the following poem from beginning to end. Then (a) Give in plain narrative form the essential facts of the story, whether expressed or only implied in the poem. (b) Point out two or three places where the poet has departed from this plain narrative form. (c) Select the stanza that you like best, and say why you prefer it.
4. Pick out in the above poem (Question 3) five words and five constructions that would not be used in ordinary modern prose; and say what words and constructions you would use in their place in ordinary prose.
5. Parse the words in italics in the following lines: (1) Nor tempt the stormy firth to-day. (2) Last night the gifted seer did view a wet shroud swathed round lady gay. (3) Why cross the gloomy firth to-day? (4) 'Tis not because the ring they ride. And analyse: Seem’d all on fire that chapel proud. Where Roslin’s chiefs uncoffined lie, Each Baron, for a sable shroud, Sheathed in his iron panoply.
6. Describe the personal appearance and individual traits of any well-drawn character that you have read about recently in prose literature (essay or fiction). Give the name of the work in which this character figures; give the author’s name; and indicate roughly the period to which the author belongs.
7. Give a short account of the subject of any one of the following poems; describe the metre; name the author (if you can) and indicate his period; and quote several (six or eight) consecutive lines: Chevy Chase, The Battle of Agincourt, II Penseroso, Alexander’s Feast, Elegy written in a Country Churchyard, The Deserted Village, The Twa Dogs, Christabel, Peter Bell, Morte D’Arthur, The Forsaken Merman.
8. Arrange the following events (or as many of them as you can) in a column in chronological order, marking the centuries down the sides of the column. Select any one event belonging to or closely connected with Scottish History, and write a paragraph on it, noting particularly the subsequent effects of the event which you select: The Plantation of Ulster, the Battle of Carham, the First Reform Bill, the Great Exhibition, the Battle of the Standard, Wat Tyler’s Revolt, the Seven Years’ War, the Algeciras Conference, the Establishment of Protestantism in Scotland, the reign of Alexander III. of Scotland, the Invention of Printing, the Spanish Armada, the Persecution of the Covenanters, the voyages of Vasco da Gama, the Act of Security.
9. Describe the life of the different orders of society (nobles, clergy, commons) in England or Scotland under the Feudal System.
10. Describe life in a Scottish burgh under the Stuart Kings.
11. Discuss Oliver Cromwell’s home and foreign policy with special reference to his treatment of Scotland and Ireland.
12. Contrast the extent of the British Empire and the internal state of Britain at the beginning and at the end of George III.’s reign. What causes brought these changes about?
13. Explain fully, with illustrative drawings, any two of the following terms: Contour line, isotherm, determination of position on a map, eclipse of the sun, effects of the inclination of the earth’s axis, meridian of Greenwich.
14. To what countries is Britain chiefly indebted for its food supply? Give in each case the nature of the supply and the chief centres of export.
15. Contrast Canada and Australia as fields for emigration.
16. Give an account of any great explorer, and tell what you know of his principal discoveries.

Lower Grade
1908
ENGLISH
2
1. Write out, and punctuate, the passage for dictation.

Higher Grade
1908
ENGLISH
1
1. Write an Essay, of about two pages, on one of the following subjects: (a) Describe the picturesque and historical features of the landscape visible from any well-known point of view in Scotland (e.g., from Stirling Castle, Edinburgh Castle, &c.). (b) A Haunted House. [The composition should take the form of a personal narrative; describe the scene of your (real or imaginary) adventure precisely.] (c) The ordinary routine of life on a large farm; or on board a ship; or in any great industry with which you are familiar.
2. Express the main thought of the following sonnet, shortly and in plain language; indicate what the expression of the thought seems to you to gain from the use of the figures and phrases italicized.
3. Analyse the last sentence of the above sonnet. Give the original meaning, and (if you can) the derivation of solemn, scenes, felicities, pensive, ruddy; and show the propriety of their use in the above sonnet.
4. Write short notes on the syntax of the words italicized in the following sentences.
5. Rewrite the following passage in Modern English, changing the spelling and the archaic expressions; and add short notes on the words italicized.
6. Describe any notable pictures of the Good Parson, the Doctor, or the Lawyer, which you have met with in English Literature. [Not more than two examples in all need be given.]
7. Discuss the appropriateness, and the poetical effect, of the following Personifications. To what period or poet would you be inclined to attribute each, and for what reasons?
8. Discuss the following statement, with illustrations from plays you have read: The heroines of Shakespeare’s comedies are all more practical and efficient than the heroes.
9. Sketch the history of the Essay in English Literature, referring specially to any two of the following names: Bacon, Addison, Goldsmith, Lamb, Hunt or Hazlitt, Macaulay or Carlyle, Arnold, Stevenson.
10. Give the titles of any five of Scott’s historical novels: indicate the period of history which each of them illustrates; mention any novels by other authors that illustrate the same periods; and, selecting one of these other authors, compare him with Scott as a historical novelist.

Higher Grade
1908
HISTORY
1
1. In the skeleton chronological chart provided place as many as you can of the following in the appropriate compartments: The Long Parliament, the Declaration of Independence, the Scottish Reformation, the last Jacobite Rebellion, the persecution of the Lollards, the Seven Years’ War, Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, the battle of Sedan, the King’s Quhair, the first Reform Bill, the American Civil War, the battle of Dunbar, the invention of the steam-engine, Clive’s victories in India, the death of Joan of Arc, the battle of Flodden.
2. Explain the circumstances which led to the battle of Harlaw. Describe the traditional incidents of the battle, and estimate its importance.
3. What do you know of the state of the Catholic Church in Scotland just before the Reformation? Describe the part played by Knox.
4. What part did the Scots play in the English Civil War from the signing of the Solemn League and Covenant to the battle of Dunbar?
5. What do you know of the state of the Highlands from (1689) to (1745)? What circumstances helped to make the Jacobite cause popular in Scotland?
6. Describe the struggle of Greece with Persia.
7. By what stages did Rome become mistress of the Mediterranean, and what was the extent of her empire at its greatest?
8. Give some account of any two of the following: Socrates, Pericles, Alexander the Great, Tarquinius Superbus, Coriolanus, Hannibal, Cicero, Cleopatra.
8. Give some account of any two of the following: Attila, Charlemagne, Hildebrand, St. Francis of Assisi, David I. of Scotland, John of Gaunt, Joan of Arc, George Buchanan.
9. What were the main causes of the Crusades, and what their effect on western civilization? Describe any one of the Crusades more particularly.
10. What was the origin of the Hundred Years’ War? Estimate its effect on Scotland, on the power of the Parliament in England, and on France.
11. Describe briefly the cause and course of the struggle between England and Spain in the 16th century, and estimate its effects on both countries.
12. How was the Revolution of (1688) brought about? On what grounds was it justified? Contrast its ultimate effect on Scotland and on Ireland.
13. Enumerate the attempts made in the 18th century to tax the American colonies. What views of Britain’s right to tax the colonies were held by Pitt, Grenville, Burke?
14. Narrate the events which led up to the battle of Waterloo, and describe the chief incidents of the battle.
15. Sketch the development of any of the great self-governing colonies.
16. Name some of the great English writers of history; indicate the periods with which they have dealt, and characterise any one of them more particularly.

Higher Grade
1908
GEOGRAPHY
1
1. The scale of the accompanying map is 1 inch = 1 mile. (a) Measure the distance from Swanage Station to Wareham Station in a direct line; by the main road through Langton Matravers; by rail. (b) Estimate the area of Branksea island (in the north of the map). (c) Describe the view looking eastwards from the point A, which lies to the south of Kingston at a height of 434 feet. (d) Describe the situation of Corfe Castle. (e) Draw a section along the line B—C in the space provided.
2. Show the course of the Tay and its chief tributaries and lakes by means of a sketch map, drawing the edge of the Highlands, and inserting and naming the Ochil and Sidlaw Hills, Crieff, Dunkeld, Perth, and Dundee. Write a brief description of the shape of the valley inside the Highland area, where a lake exists.
3. Write a short account of (a) the situation, (b) the character, (c) the cause, (d) the economic importance of the grasslands of Australia, or of those of Africa, or of those of North America.
4. Choose any one of the following rivers—(a) State in what mountain system or plateau it rises; (b) in what direction and (c) through what kind of country the main stream flows to the sea; and (d) describe the mouth of the river. (e) Point out the climatic conditions of its source; and (f) whether it passes through other climatic regions. (g) Note the time of year at which you would expect it to be flooded; and (h) give your reasons: Nile; Ob (or Obi); Amazon; Missouri-Mississippi; Danube; Yang-tse-Kiang.
5. Draw a map to show the chief towns in any one of the following industrial areas. Discuss the nature of their industries and how geographical conditions have helped to make them important: The Lower Clyde and its Estuary. The West Riding of Yorkshire. Saxony. New England.