HIGHER GRADE
(1909)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a Composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following subjects: Describe an imaginary visit to, and conversation with, some famous author, or some character in a book, with whose personal appearance, habits and views you are fairly well acquainted. Aerial Navigation—what has been achieved, and what may be looked for. Reproduce in narrative form the most striking scene in any play that you have read. Reproduce in dialogue form the most striking chapter in any novel that you have read.
2. The following extract is from Burke’s Letter to a Noble Lord. State exactly, in one sentence, and without metaphor, the meaning of the passage. Explain the precise metaphor employed by Burke, and show how it is carried out in detail.
3. Select ten of the following words, and make ten sentences, using, in each, one of the words in its correct modern sense; show how the word has changed from its original meaning, and add the derivation where you can: Caitiff, considerable, cunning, entail, ghostly, humour, knave, jovial, minister, nice, person, predicament, presently, recreant, shamefaced, temper, villain.
4. Rewrite the following passage in modern English, modernizing the spelling, the vocabulary and the constructions where necessary. Add short notes on the words in italics.
5. How did the speech of the Court and London come to be accepted as Standard English?
6. Describe the framework in which Chaucer has set his Canterbury Tales. Compare it with the setting of any other collection of stories known to you. What are the advantages of Chaucer’s plan?
7. How has Spenser personified and characterized any three of the following qualities in The Faerie Queene: Hypocrisy, Superstition, Christian Truth, Worldly Pride, Avarice, Chivalry, Despair, Hope?
8. Contrast these two passages in respect of poetic truth, imagery and diction. To what period would you assign each, and why? Quote, or refer to, any other famous verses on Sleep in English poetry.
9. Discuss the statement that "Every play of Shakespeare has its special climate, its definite season, its local peculiarities" with reference to any play or plays that you have read.
10. Distinguish three periods in Milton’s literary life. With what "high purpose" did he undertake the composition of Paradise Lost? What is meant by calling it a "classical Epic," and how does it differ in construction from such narrative poems as The Faerie Queene or Marmion? Quote a few characteristic lines to show metre and style.
11. Discuss the treatment in imaginative literature of any famous historical character. If the treatment seems strikingly inaccurate or unfair, try to account for this.
12. Name your favourite essayist, indicate his range and choice of subjects, and consider what light they throw upon his times, and upon his own tastes and character.

HIGHER GRADE
(1909)
HISTORY
PAPER: 2
1. In the skeleton chronological chart provided, place as many as you can of the following in the appropriate compartments: The Battle of Otterburn, the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the Thirty Years’ War, the capture of Quebec, the Repeal of the Corn Laws, the Wars of the Roses, the Berlin Conference, Foundation of St. Andrews University, the Cowrie Conspiracy, the Treaty of Northampton, the Darien Scheme, the War of the Spanish Succession, the Conquest of Peru, the Methodist Revival, the capture of Constantinople by the Turks.
2. It has been maintained that it would have been better for Scotland to have submitted to Edward I. What would she have gained thereby? And what should we have lost?
3. Give some facts which illustrate the state of Scotland as regards industry and commerce, education and literature in James Fourth’s reign.
4. Describe the situation of any three famous ruined abbeys, monasteries or cathedrals in Scotland. How did they come to be built where they are? And what led to their destruction?
5. Illustrate by three examples the part played by Scotsmen in building up the British Empire.
6. Describe the relations of Judea with either the great Empires of the East, Greece, or Rome.
7. What do you know of the state of Greece as revealed in the Homeric poems?
8. Of what period in Athenian history, and of what great names, is Milton thinking in his reference to "Athens, the eye of Greece, mother of arts And eloquence, native to famous wits"?
9. Give some account of the various stages in the conquest of Britain by the Romans. Why did they abandon the island in 410 A.D.?
10. Give some account of any two of the following: Solon, Miltiades, Demosthenes, Philip of Macedon, Pyrrhus, the elder Scipio, Catiline, Pompey, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius. Or give some account of any two of the following: Charles Martel, Rollo the Ganger, Saladin, the Black Prince, Charles the Bold, Sir David Lindsay, Cortez, Mary of Guise, Calvin, Gustavus Adolphus.
11. Sketch shortly the spread of Christianity in Britain up to the Synod of Whitby, with special reference to the parts played by Augustine and Columba.
12. Describe the origin of the English navy, and the part played by it either in the Hundred Years’ War, under the Commonwealth, or in the Napoleonic wars.
13. Give a clear account of any one of the following: the reign of Richard II.; the policy and career of Cardinal Wolsey; the career and fate of Robert, Earl of Essex; Chatham’s foreign policy; English politics from 1815 to 1832; European developments from 1848 to 1872.
14. Trace the course taken by the Reformation in England, and contrast this with its course in Scotland and in France.
15. Discuss the change in the relative positions of France and Britain as European Powers between 1660 and 1760.
16. What is meant by the Eastern Question? Through what phases has it passed since the Crimean War?

HIGHER GRADE
(1909)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 3
1. The scale of the accompanying map is 1 inch = 1 mile. Measure the distance from A to B by footpath. Measure the area of the land shown on the map. Write a brief description of the general character of the country. Draw a section along the line CD in the space provided on the map.
2. Draw a map to show the chief towns and railways of that part of Scotland which lies east of the Nith and south of the Central Lowlands. Show the connections with Edinburgh.
3. Draw a map either of the Alps, the Appalachian Mountain System, the Deccan, or the Eastern Highlands of Australia. Show the chief rivers.
4. Compare the intertropical forest of Africa with that of South America in respect of situation and character. Show how these forest conditions affect the life of the inhabitants.
5. What are the chief wheat-producing regions of either the Old World or the New World? Point out in what month or months of the year harvest is likely to take place in each region named, and give reasons for this.
6. Describe carefully the situation of Scone, Dunfermline and Edinburgh. Give full reasons for the importance of each at the time when it was a royal residence.
7. Write geographical notes on any two of the following statements: "Monsoon lands have special advantages for the early development of civilization." "The Western Plains of Canada are more likely to be economically profitable than the Eastern Plains." "The animals of New Zealand show that it must have long been separated from other lands." "Too large an army will starve in Spain; too small a one cannot hold the country." "The West Indies were the most important British Colonies a century ago. They are so no longer."

LOWER GRADE
(1909)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write out, and punctuate, the passage for dictation.
2. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of these subjects: Write an imaginary account of a shipwreck, in the form of a letter from a survivor. An English boy, who has come to Scotland to finish his school education, writes home describing what strikes him most in the manners, character and habits of his new class-mates. Describe any scientific experiment or series of experiments, or any geographical excursion, in which you have yourself taken part.
3. Read the following poem from beginning to end. Tell Sir Humphrey Gilbert’s fate in your own words. Point out the metaphor which runs through the poem, bringing together all the lines in which it appears.
4. Turn the first passage into direct speech, and the second into reported speech, adding notes to show the exact meaning of fanaticism, wreathe, sentiments, muster, lieges. Or parse the words in italics in the given sentence. Distinguish the meanings of the following pairs of words, and make sentences to show their correct use: paternal, fatherly; human, humane; new, novel; mutual, common; quantity, number.
5. Give some account of any famous allegory that you have read. Name the author, and his period. Tell briefly how the story runs, and what is its inner meaning. Or mention songs dealing with any five of these themes: Spring, War, Lovers Parting, Birds and Flowers, Country Life, Freedom, Death, the Fairy World. Quote a stanza or two from one of them. Name the author of the song you quote, and say what you know about him. Or mention, with author’s names and periods, any three historical novels, poems or plays, that have helped you to picture the life of England or of Scotland at any period in the past. What light do they throw on the times they describe?
6. Arrange the following events chronologically in three columns, according to the century and the country in which each happened: Battle of Largs, Dissolution of the Monasteries, Discovery of the New World, Seven Years’ War, Jack Cade’s Rebellion, the Cession of Orkney to Scotland, the First Scottish Parliament, the First Hague Conference, the Campaigns of Montrose, the Conquest of Bengal, the Campaigns of Garibaldi, the Battle of Langside, Magna Charta, Authorised Version of the Bible, the Reign of Louis XIV. of France. Select one event from each column, and write a paragraph about it.
7. Arrange the following persons according to the century and the country in which each flourished: James I. of Scotland, Copernicus, Martin Luther, Viscount Dundee, the Black Prince, Peter the Great, John Milton, Thomas Chalmers, Wiclif, the Regent Moray, the elder Pitt, Joan of Arc, George Washington, James Watt, Lord Bacon. Write a short paragraph on one person taken from each column, showing the historical importance of the person chosen.
8. Draw a rough outline map of the New World and mark on it the Equator, the Tropics, the Arctic Circle; the rivers Mackenzie, St. Lawrence, Missouri-Mississippi, Amazon and La Plata; the Rocky Mountains, Appalachian Range, and Andes; the position of New York, Quebec, and Buenos Ayres; and show by shading the part of N. America where wheat is grown.
9. Draw a rough outline map of Scotland and mark on it Glenmore, the southern edge of the Grampians, the Sidlaw Hills, Ochil Hills, Campsie Fells and Lowther Hills; the rivers Tay, Clyde and Tweed; the position of Wick, Aberdeen, Perth, Stirling and Dumfries; and show the coalfields by shading.
10. Enumerate, in order of importance, the chief sources of the world’s supply of wool and cotton; and infer the climatic conditions which are favourable to the production of each of these commodities.
11. Locate any five of the following towns carefully and explain the causes which have contributed to their importance: Carstairs, Southampton, St. Etienne, Lille, Vienna, Salonica, Smyrna, Bombay, Singapore, Shanghai, Durban, Halifax (N.S.), St. Louis, Havana, Valparaiso.

LOWER GRADE
(1909)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Name the century in which each of the following events happened, and add a brief note on any three of them: Battle of Carham; the Reformation by Parliament of the Scottish Church; the Darien Scheme; the Porteous Riots; the defeat of the Armada; the Persecution of the Covenanters; Declaration of Independence; Repeal of the Corn Laws; Death of Joan of Arc; the Franco-Prussian War.
2. What different peoples occupied Scotland between the coming of Columba and the death of Alexander III? Indicate some of the events by which they were welded into the nation which resisted Edward.
3. Tell the story of the struggle for Scottish Independence from the death of Alexander III to the Treaty of Northampton, and name some of the poems in which the achievements of the heroes have been celebrated.
4. What do you know of any one of the following events in Scottish History: the policy and death of James I; the conflict between the House of Stewart and the House of Douglas in the reign of James II; the circumstances that led to, and the incidents of, the battle of Flodden.
5. Trace the events which led to the conversion of Scotland to Protestantism and show how they were affected by the relations of Scotland to England and to France.
6. Describe the character and career of two of the following: Mary of Guise, John Knox, the Regent Morton, James VI, the Marquis of Montrose, Prince Charles Edward.
7. What do you know of the origin of the English Parliament and its power under the Plantagenets and under the Tudors?
8. What was the origin of the Hundred Years’ War? Sketch its course; name some of the principal battles; and show how it affected Scotland and the English Parliament.
9. Describe the character of Henry VIII, and show how the Reformation in England differed from the Reformation in Scotland.
10. State what you know of one of the following events, and of its importance for English History: the Conquest of Wales, the Colonisation of America, the Hampton Court Conference, the Solemn League and Covenant, the Seven Years’ War, the Revolt of the American Colonies.
11. Describe the character and career of two of the following: William the Conqueror, Cardinal Wolsey, Oliver Cromwell, the Duke of Marlborough, the elder Pitt, Nelson, Sir Robert Peel.
12. Charles V of Spain is generally spoken of as "The Emperor." What was he Emperor of and where did this title come from?
13. What do you know of the discovery and settling of America?
14. What were the Crusades? What part in them was taken by Scottish or English Kings? Did they have any effect on our life and customs?
15. Who were two of the following, and what importance have they for Scottish, English, or British History: King Haco; Gregory the Great; Joan of Arc; Martin Luther; John Calvin; Philip IV of Spain; Christopher Columbus; William the Silent; the Duke of Guise; Frederick the Great; Napoleon Buonaparte; Prince Bismarck; Abraham Lincoln?
16. What are "the Great Powers of Europe"? Give a very brief account of the history of any one of them since 1850, with special reference to its present relations with Britain.

LOWER GRADE
(1909)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 2
1. On the outline map of the Eastern Hemisphere, insert the Tropic of Capricorn, China, Arabia, the Mediterranean Sea, the Sahara Desert, the Tundra. Draw and name the rivers Congo and Hwang-ho, and the Himalaya and Ural Mountains. Show the position of Cape Town, Colombo, Constantinople, Hongkong, Melbourne, Tokyo.
2. On the outline map of North America, draw and name the Rocky Mountains and the Mississippi and St. Lawrence rivers. Insert Cuba and Newfoundland. Show the position of Mexico, New York and Vancouver. Write "cotton" and "wheat" over the regions where these are the chief crops.
3. On the map showing the rivers and coasts of Scotland, insert the Clyde, Spey, Tay, Arran, Skye, Glenmore, Fife, Caithness, Solway Firth, Ben Nevis, Ben Lomond, the Pentland Hills. Show the position of Aberdeen, Ayr, Berwick, Crieff, Dumfries, Oban, Perth, Wick. Measure the distance in a direct line from Berwick to Wick and from Aberdeen to Oban.
4. Describe a delta, a fiord, a glacier, and sand dunes. Give a European example of each.
5. Why is it warmer at the equator in spring and autumn than anywhere else? Where would you expect it to be warmest at our midsummer? Why?
6. Describe two of the following and the life of their inhabitants: The coasts of Greenland, the Steppes of Russia, the forests of Central Africa, the Veldt, Palestine.
7. Where are the following occupations carried on in the British Isles? Give any explanations you can: Cotton Manufacturing, Linen Manufacturing, Shipbuilding.