HIGHER GRADE
(1912)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following subjects: (a) "Plutus, the god of wealth, has been blinded by Jupiter for threatening to enrich only the virtuous. He is found wandering about the earth in the guise of an old beggar..." (b) "Without war the world would deteriorate into materialism. Courage of the ancient heroic physical kind has been preserved in modern character..." (c) Describe briefly but vividly any one of the following episodes: the death of Socrates; the deposition of Richard II; the first voyage of Columbus...
2. Explain in your own words the meaning of the poem "To my Father"; bring out fully the comparison implied in the last three lines between the son’s work and the father’s.
3. In the following sentences indicate the exact meaning of any ten of the words printed in italics: (a) "He that will not when he may..." (b) "Charles may yet be a credit..." (c) "An Englishman’s house is his castle..." [Full list maintained]
4. Give the precise meaning of any ten italicized words in 16th/17th century English extracts: (a) "Full jolly knight he seemed..." (b) "And certain stars shot madly..." [All options retained]
5. Select some play (e.g., A Midsummer Night’s Dream) where Shakespeare combined different story threads. How many threads? How combined? Why?
6. Compare Elizabeth Bennet, Diana Vernon, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara Grant. Name their novels/authors. Compare two+ characters. State preferences.
7. Discuss whether essayists reveal their personality through works, using any two of: Bacon, Addison, Lamb, Carlyle.
8. What do you know about traditional Scottish ballads? Name 19th-century ballad poets. Compare ancient vs modern ballads.
9. Discuss Chaucer/Spenser/Milton as verse storytellers. Address story construction, character drawing, description.
10. Which Victorian writers (excluding historians) best illustrate Victorian life? What aspects do they show?

LOWER GRADE
(1912)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition on: (a) The Coming of Spring (lengthening days, nature awakening) (b) Imagined London Coronation experience (c) Vivid description of historical incidents like Bruce's Methven adventures
2. Tell the story of Browning's "Incident of the French Camp" in your own words. Add overall poem evaluation.
3. For the Browning poem: (a) Define prone, mused, vans, quick, Sire using context/derivations (b) Analyze second stanza structure
4. (a) Scan meter in given lines (b) Write informal/formal refusal letters (c) Explain proverbs like "Bird in hand..."
5. Choose: (a) Describe supernatural elements in plays/novels (b) Retell Greek/Roman myth (c) Summarize poems' subjects (d) Suggest story-to-play adaptation

LOWER GRADE
(1912)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. (a) Place these in centuries: Murder of Darnley, Agricola's invasion, Black Death (b) Identify historical references in poetry quotes
2. Explain Kenneth MacAlpin, Constantine III, Macbeth in Scottish history
3. Why was David I called "sair saint for the Crown"? List four abbeys and monastic contributions
4. Why were Stirling Bridge, Loudoun Hill, and Bannockburn turning points in Scottish independence
5. Describe medieval Scottish leisure activities
6. Illustrate "Woe to the land when the king is a child" using Stewart dynasty examples
7. Compare wealthy Scottish regions in late 17th vs early 19th century. Causes of 18th-century commerce growth?
8. Explain three terms: Solemn League/Covenant, Darien Scheme, Act of Security
9. Compare careers of two figures: Andrew Melville, Sir Walter Scott, General Gordon
10. Describe two: Emperor Augustus, Thomas Cromwell, Abraham Lincoln
11. Trace Anglo-French connections from Norman Conquest to King John
12. Explain accessions: Edward III, Henry IV, Charles II
13. Effects of gunpowder, printing press, English Bible on England
14. Explain historical context of "Hampden’s, Russell’s glory/Sidney’s shade..."
15. Why were William III and Earl of Bute unpopular?
16. Initial English sympathy then opposition to French Revolution?
17. Account of Napoleon III's career

HIGHER GRADE
(1912)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. Using provided map: (a) Draw cross-section Tom Meadhoin to Bidean nam Bian (b) Calculate triangular area size (c) Analyze Loch Leven depth/shape (d) Describe Bidean nam Bian's topography (e) Compare views from different vantage points
2. Analyze temperature/rainfall graphs for Stations A/B. Name possible regions matching climate
3. Define four: llanos, industrial inertia, roaring forties, dissected plateau
4. Compare relief representation methods (contours, hachures etc). State advantages
5. Describe field mapping methods for local area near school
6. Create shaded US rainfall map with legend. Explain distribution causes
7. Trace UK cotton industry: raw material sources, manufacturing districts, localization factors
8. Describe London-Constantinople rail route: channel ports, countries, cities
9. Contrast Norway/Sweden: terrain, climate, resources, occupations
10. Describe animal life adaptations in South America or Australia
11. Comment on geographical statements: Foehn winds, English/Scottish invasion routes
12. Full analysis of Volga/Congo river systems: source regions, seasonal floods, towns