LOWER GRADE
1913
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following subjects: (a) The life of a stream, described by itself, from its source to where it joins a river. (b) If you had lived in the days of the Civil War, would you have been a Cavalier or a Round-head? Or, If you had lived in the days of the ’45, would you have been for Prince Charlie or against him? (c) Character of a School Friend.
2. Tell the story of the following poem in your own words. Use simple language, but try to bring out all the details. Do not be content with a mere summary: On the Death of a favourite Cat, drowned in a Tub of Gold-fishes.
3. (a) Scan the first stanza of the above poem, marking the feet and accents and naming the metre. (b) Explain the exact meaning of the following words, as used in the above poem, and give in each case another word from the same root: pensive, hapless, averse, presumptuous, malignant.
4. (a) Parse the words italicised in the following sentences: "By this time the men in the firing line were so exhausted that they were falling asleep as they lay. So the force withdrew after firing a random volley." (b) Explain the meaning and (if you can) the origin of the following phrases: "a Job’s comforter," "to kill the fatted calf," "a worshipper of Mammon," "to cultivate the Muses," "Vanity Fair." (c) Write a very short advertisement for a furnished house at the seaside, specifying the accommodation desired. Write (in the third person) an answer to such an advertisement, giving particulars as to situation, advantages, and terms.
5a. The poem in Question 2 was written by Thomas Gray. Tell what you know about his life, and his other poems. Illustrate your answer by quotations.
5b. Name five poems (other than that given in Question 2) which deal with animals (including birds). Give authors’ names and periods. Write a full account of any one of the poems that you mention.
5c. Name all the female characters in any play that you have read. Add a descriptive sentence about each, and give a fuller description of the one you like best, showing what part she takes in the action of the play.
5d. Name the author of each of the following works, with the century in which it was written; and tell in a single sentence what each work is about. Then select one of the works and give as full an account of it as you can: The Pilgrim’s Progress, Part II.; The Vision of Mirza; The Traveller; The Essays of Elia; The Lay of the Last Minstrel; Rob Roy; A Christmas Carol; Tom Brown’s Schooldays; Westward Ho!; The Master of Ballantrae.

LOWER GRADE
1913
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Place the following events in their chronological order, noting in each case the century in which it occurred: The Great Rebellion against Charles I.; the Jacobite Risings; the Battle of Agincourt; the repulse of the Spanish Armada; the Repeal of the Corn Laws; the Battle of Flodden; the Siege of Ladysmith; the Wars of the Roses; the Declaration of American Independence; the foundation of the University of St. Andrews; the mission of St. Augustine to the English; the Battle of Trafalgar; the foundation of the House of Commons in England; the union of the Scots and Picts under Kenneth MacAlpine; the Treaty of Falaise, between Henry II. and William the Lyon; the Battle of Plassey.
2. Explain briefly, but clearly, the following terms: Puritan, Covenanter, Presbyterian, Franchise, Cabinet, Budget.
3. What various peoples have combined to form the Scottish nation? Which of these peoples seems to you to have played the greatest part in Scottish history?
4. Explain the importance in Scottish history of the reigns of Malcolm II., Malcolm III. (Canmore), and David I.
5. What notable events do you associate with any six of the following places: Carham, Falkirk, Norham, Prestonpans, Philiphaugh, Fotheringay, Dunbar, Perth, Bothwell Brig?
6. When and why was the Franco-Scottish alliance formed, and when and why did it come to an end?
7. When and why did Jacobitism decline in Scotland?
8. Give some account of any two of the following: Pericles, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Mohammed, Charles the Great, Erasmus, Dupleix, Warren Hastings, Lord Palmerston, Lord Roberts.
9. Explain the allusions in any four of the following passages: (a) But there’s a saying very old and true, "If that you will France win, Then with Scotland first begin." For once the eagle England being in prey, To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs. (b) Hath she forgot already that brave prince, Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since, Stabb’d in my angry mood at Tewkesbury? (c) There were fifty thousand Highlandmen A-marching to Harlaw. (d) "O, were you ever a soldier?" Sir David Lesly said. "O yes, I was at Solway Flow Where we were all betrayed." (e) On Evesham’s plain is Montfort slain. (f) When that great fleet invincible against her bore The richest spoils of Mexico, the stoutest hearts of Spain. (g) Six thousand veterans practised in war’s game, Tried men, at Killiecrankie were array’d Against an equal host that wore the plaid, Shepherds and herdsmen. (h) This is he who ... Round affrighted Lisbon drew The treble works, the vast designs Of his laboured rampart-lines.
10. How do you account for the fact that by the reign of Edward III. the distinction between Norman and Englishman had disappeared?
11. What achievements do you associate with the following names: The Black Prince, Caxton, Drake, Monk, Rodney, George Washington?
12. State what you know about—the Pilgrim Fathers, Pride’s Purge, the Letters of Junius, the Reform Act of (1832).
13. How were Napoleon’s plans frustrated in each case by Nelson’s victories at the Nile, Copenhagen, Trafalgar?
14. Describe the character and the political career of Mr. Gladstone.

LOWER GRADE
1913
ENGLISH
PAPER: 3
1. On the accompanying map of the world: (a) Insert in their proper places the following names: Borneo, Lake Chad, Appalachian Mountains, River Neva, Bass Strait, Orange River, Florida, Tibet, Sardinia. (b) Show by a dot the position of the following towns, and write the name of each close to the dot: Adrianople, Bilbao, Canton, Colombo, Philadelphia, Valparaiso, Lagos, Hobart, Dunedin. (c) Either write the names of the following races over their native places: Kafir, Maori, Dyak, Ainu, Bushman, Lapp, Magyar, Papuan. Or draw, parallel to the equator, straight lines representing the Arctic Circle, the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Antarctic Circle.
2. On the accompanying map of the British Isles: (a) Insert the names of two (but not more than two) towns famous for each of the following industries, adding the name of the industry in brackets: cutlery, brewing, book-publishing, ship-building, boot-making. (b) Show by dark pencil-shading the parts of the British Isles that have a heavy rainfall (say over sixty inches per annum), and by light shading the parts that have a small rainfall (say under twenty-five inches). Leave the intermediate region blank. (c) Insert in their proper places the following names: Cromarty Firth, Ochil Hills, Stranraer, R. Humber, the Lizard, Cardigan Bay, Lough Foyle, Valentia.
3. Give an account of the fishing industry of the United Kingdom.
4. At noon on the 21st June how high is the sun above the horizon at (a) the equator, (b) the Tropic of Cancer, (c) the Tropic of Capricorn, (d) the North Pole? Give reasons or illustrate your answer by sketches.
5. Describe briefly the general character of the Balkan Peninsula, the races that inhabit it, and their chief occupations. Illustrate by a sketch map showing the countries, their capitals, and the main railway lines.
6. Describe a coasting voyage from Colombo to Hong Kong. At what seaports might a call be made? State the nature of the cargo likely to be brought on board at each port.
7. Compare the Central Plain of Ireland with the Central Lowlands of Scotland. Refer especially to physical features, industries, and distribution of the population.
8. Select any two of the following towns. Name their chief industries, and, if possible, show how the industries have been affected by the position of the towns: Swansea, Pittsburg, Dunfermline, Johannesburg, Belfast, Vienna.

HIGHER GRADE
1913
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition on any one of the following subjects: (a) Describe, as you would to an English friend of your own age, your school life and experiences during the last five or six years. (b) Describe some famous ruin—palace, castle, cathedral, &c.—that you have seen, with reflections on the lives of its former occupants. (c) Discuss the character, either of Mary Queen of Scots, or of Oliver Cromwell, or of Napoleon Buonaparte. (d) Flowers—the pleasure they afford at the different seasons of the year; with remarks on their treatment in Poetry.
2. Rewrite this speech in modern prose, so as to bring out the argument clearly: "Peace, Brother; be not over-exquisite To cast the fashion of uncertain evils; For grant they be so, while they rest unknown, What need a man forestall his date of grief, And run to meet what he would most avoid? Or if they be but false alarms of fear, How bitter is such self-delusion! I do not think my sister so to seek, Or so unprincipled in virtue’s book, And the sweet peace that goodness bosoms ever, As that the single want of light and noise (Not being in danger, as I trust she is not) Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts, And put them into mis-becoming plight. Virtue could see to do what virtue would By her own radiant light, though sun and moon Were in the flat sea sunk..."
3. (a) Write a note on each of the words italicised in the above passage; bring out its exact meaning as there used, and note any change of meaning that it may have undergone since Milton. (b) Define accurately, and illustrate by example or reference, the terms Gerund, Hyperbole, Caesura, Alliteration, the Dramatic Unities. (c) Here is a piece of blank verse printed as prose. Write it out as verse, without changing a word or the order of the words: "There lies a vale in Ida, lovelier than all the valleys of Ionian hills. The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen, puts forth an arm, and creeps from pine to pine, and loiters, slowly drawn. On either hand the lawns and meadow-ledges midway down hang rich in flowers." (d) Distinguish the exact force of the pairs of words or idioms italicised in the following sentences: 1. "There are two kinds of speeches—the speech a man makes when he has something to say, and the speech he makes when he has to say something." 2. "Do you have breakfast at 8?" as compared with "Has she blue eyes?" 3. "He told me he went home. So he did," as compared with "I told him to go home; so he went."
4. Discuss and illustrate any one of the following criticisms: (a) "The principal thought of Gray’s Elegy, which the poet illustrates in a variety of ways, is the essential equality of men." (b) "In the Ode on the Intimations of Immortality, Wordsworth seeks to explain the feeling of mystery with which nature affected him in youth, and to console himself for its disappearance in later life." (c) "The author’s design in L’Allegro and II Penseroso is not merely to show how objects derive their colour from the mind, but rather how every disposition of mind takes hold on those objects by which it may be gratified."
5. Describe and compare any one pair from among the following pairs of characters: Chaucer’s Clerk of Oxenford and Scott’s Dominie Sampson; Shakespeare’s Macbeth and Milton’s Satan; the Jewish characters in The Merchant of Venice and those in Ivanhoe; Falstaff and Mr. Micawber; David Copperfield and Arthur Pendennis.
6. Tell what you know of the rise of the Essay in the eighteenth century, and of the part played by Steele and Addison. What aim had they in view in their moral, their social, and their critical essays? What kind of prose style did they cultivate?
7. Name five of our chief historians, with the periods in which they lived. Give the title of one work by each, and give a fuller account of any one of these works—its subject, style and spirit.
8. Explain fully the historical or other allusions in the following passages. Name, if you can, the author of each passage, and add a sentence or two about the poem from which it is taken: (a) "A king sat on the rocky brow That looks o’er sea-born Salamis." (b) "’Twas at the royal feast for Persia won By Philip’s warlike son." (c) "When the British warrior Queen, Bleeding from the Roman rods..." (d) "Perhaps the self-same song that found a path Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home, She stood in tears amid the alien corn." (e) "Avenge, oh Lord, thy slaughtered saints whose bones Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold."
9. Compare the two following descriptions of the same scene carefully, in respect of the pictures, the language and the thought. What is there in the verse that is not in the prose? "We mounted the Dover coach at Charing Cross. The city, St. Paul’s, with the river and a multitude of little boats, made a most beautiful sight as we crossed Westminster Bridge. The houses were not overhung by their cloud of smoke, and they were spread out endlessly, yet the sun shone so brightly and with such a fierce light, that there was even something like the purity of one of Nature’s own grand spectacles." (Dorothy Wordsworth) (b) "Earth hath not anything to show more fair; Dull would he be of soul who could pass by A sight so touching in its majesty: The City now doth like a garment wear The beauty of the morning; silent, bare, Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie Open unto the fields and to the sky; All bright and glittering in the smokeless air. Never did sun more beautifully steep In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill; Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep! The river glideth at his own sweet will; Dear God! the very houses seem asleep; And all that mighty heart is lying still." (William Wordsworth)

HIGHER GRADE
1913
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. (a) Explain carefully the meaning, or meanings, of the following political terms: Government, executive, legislature, republic, cabinet, constitutional government, federation, suzerainty. (b) How would you describe the governments of any six of the following States: ancient Sparta, ancient Athens, Rome under Augustus, mediaeval Venice, mediaeval Florence, the United Provinces in the seventeenth century, the United States, the modern German Empire, the United Kingdom?
2. Give a short account of the chief invasions of Britain before (1066), pointing out the importance of each.
3. Note and explain the successive changes in the policy pursued by Edward I. towards Scotland.
4. "The Franco-Scottish alliance was more beneficial to France than to Scotland." Discuss this statement.
5. What is meant by the "Renaissance," and how did it affect England and Scotland?
6. Explain the chief difficulties which confronted Mary Stewart during her actual rule in Scotland.
7. Write short notes on any three of the following: the Feudal System, the Act of Union of (1707), the Industrial Revolution, Grattan’s Parliament, the Disruption of (1843).
8. "Disraeli rose to power as the champion of Tory Democracy at home and of Imperialism abroad." Explain this statement.
9. Sketch, in outline the history of Britain’s rule in South Africa during the nineteenth century.
10. Give a brief account of any two of the following: the repulse of the Persian invasions of Greece, the defeat of Athens at the close of the Peloponnesian war, the conquests of Alexander the Great, the conquest of Greece by the Romans.
11. Compare the influence of sea-power in the history of Athens and of Rome.
12a. Account for the ultimate failure of Hannibal’s campaigns in Italy.
12b. Examine the main causes of the downfall of republican government in Rome.
13. To whom are the following utterances attributed, and to what do they refer? (a) "God granting me life, I will make the key keep the castle and the bracken-bush the cow." (b) "The crown came with a lass, and ’twill go with a lass." (c) "Presbyterianism is no religion for a gentleman." (d) "I rejoice that America has resisted; three millions of people so dead to all the feelings of liberty as voluntarily to submit to be slaves would be fit instruments to have made slaves of the rest." (e) "I called a new world into existence to redress the balance of the old."
14a. "The Norman Conquest was a curse to England."
14b. "The Great Rebellion was the last of the Wars of Religion."
14c. "Revolutions have usually been made by a resolute and united minority."
15. Illustrate and account for the importance in history of any three of the following cities: Jerusalem, Constantinople, Alexandria, Lisbon, Vienna, Antwerp.
16. Account for the powerful impulse to geographical discovery in the later part of the fifteenth century, and explain the direction taken by the great explorers of the period.
17. Give a short account of any three of the following: the Diet of Worms (1520), the Massacre of St. Bartholomew (1572), the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), the Congress of Vienna (1815), the Congress of Berlin (1878), the origin of the present entente between Britain and France.

HIGHER GRADE
1913
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. (a) In the space provided below the map draw a section along the River Kin glass. The source and the mouth of the stream and its confluence with the Allt Hallater are marked on the space. (b) Is there any indication of delta formation in Loch Etive? If so, name the places. (c) Draw two rough sketches showing the appearance of the ridge running from Beinn Eunaich, through Beinn a’ Chochuill, Aonach Breac, and A’ Ghruach, to Loch Etive (1) as seen from Ben Cruachan, (2) as seen from Beinn Mheadhonach (N.W. of Ben Cruachan and on opposite side of Loch Etive). (d) Taking Ben Cruachan as the whole area bounded by Loch Etive, Glen Noe, Allt Mhoille, head of Loch Awe, Pass of Brander, and River Awe, describe the appearance of the mountain. Refer particularly to the general appearance of the whole mass, the presence or absence of a conical summit, narrow ridges, coires, precipices, contrasted types of valleys.
2. Give a brief account of glaciers and glacial action. What evidence is there for thinking that there were once many glaciers in this country?
3. What is meant by "natural regions"? Select one of the following, and show how it may be divided into natural regions: Europe, North America, Asia, Australia? Explain the basis (climatic, structural, &c.) of your classification.
4. What are map projections? Why can no map projection give an absolutely correct representation of the surface of the earth? Mention three projections, state their merits and defects, and sketch roughly for one projection a network of meridians and parallels.
5. From an examination of the accompanying map, which shows the isobars recorded on a day in winter, describe the weather that may be expected (a) in Scotland, (b) in France. Refer to temperature, rainfall, direction and force of wind, fog, sunshine, &c.
6. Write a short essay on one of the following: Beet-sugar production in Europe; wheat-growing in Canada; cotton cultivation in India. Pay attention mainly to the geographical aspect of the subject.
7. Give a brief sketch of the history of exploration in modern times of one of the following: The North Polar Regions, the South Polar Regions, the Nile, Australia, Central Asia.
8. "The strategic towns of olden times have evolved into the important railway centres of to-day." Illustrate this statement by the discussion of any town in Britain.
9. Select any two of the following towns, and show how geographical conditions have controlled their situation and growth: Bombay, Cardiff, San Francisco, Melbourne, Constantinople, Cape Town.
10. Describe the extent of the Ottoman Empire to-day. What additional territories in Europe did Turkey formerly possess? What geographical causes contributed to the spread and the decline of the Ottoman power?
11. Draw a sketch map of one of the following: The Pacific Coast of the United States, North Coast of Africa, East Coast of Australia, South Coast of Asia from the Red Sea to Ceylon. Show the high ground near the coast by shading, insert the lower courses of the chief rivers, and indicate six towns. Add a brief note describing the climate of the coast selected.
