LOWER GRADE
(1915)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following: Either (a) Your first day in school. Or (b) Invent, or reproduce, a short story to illustrate the proverb “A stitch in time saves nine.” Or (c) Discuss, in the form of a dialogue, the relative merits of the Highlands and the Seaside as places in which to spend the summer holidays.
2a. Tell, in your own words, the story which forms the subject of the following poem. Take the facts from the poem itself. Be careful to distinguish the introduction, the prophecy, and the conclusion.
2b. Explain the expressions italicised.
3a. Give a detailed analysis of the first six lines of the above poem (“When the British .... hoary chief”).
3b. Explain carefully the meaning of—when, matchless, progeny, prophetic, awful as used in the above poem.
4a. Write a short note on each of the following phrases, explaining the meaning: the curse of Cain; the Benjamin of the family; a Leviathan ship; to do a thing at the eleventh hour; to hide one’s light under a bushel.
4b. Write a short letter of thanks to your hostess after paying a visit.
5a. What poems begin with these lines? Name the authors, if you can; and give a full account of any one of the poems, quoting freely from it.
5b. Describe any one of these, naming book and author.
5c. Reproduce from any book you have read (naming book and author) a description of a trial; or of a duel; or of an escape from prison; or of a whale-hunt.
6. Whether originally of a timid temperament or not, he was certainly possessed of perfect courage at last. In siege and battle, in the deadly air of pestilential cities, in the long exhaustion of mind and body which comes from unduly protracted labour and anxiety, amid the countless conspiracies of assassins, he was daily exposed to death in every shape. Rank and fortune were offered to any malefactor who would compass his murder. Under such circumstances even a brave man might have seen a pitfall at every step. On the contrary, he was ever cheerful, and hardly took more precaution than usual. “God in His mercy,” said he, with unaffected simplicity, “will maintain my innocence and my honour during my life and in future ages. As to my fortune and my life, I have dedicated both, long since, to His service.”

LOWER GRADE
(1915)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. What sovereigns were reigning (a) in Scotland and (b) in England when each of the following events took place: the battle of Pinkie; the battle of Bosworth Field; the battle of Hastings; the Gowrie Conspiracy; the battle of Otterburn; the foundation of the University of St. Andrews; the battle of Crecy; the rebellion of Perkin Warbeck?
2. Explain briefly the connexion either (a) between religious persecution and the foundation of the New England colonies; or (b) between the Trial of the Seven Bishops and the Revolution of 1688; or (c) between the conquest of Canada and the American War of Independence; or (d) between the Crimean War and the Liberation of Italy.
3. What part was played in early Scottish history by (a) St. Columba, (b) Kenneth MacAlpine, and (c) Constantine III.?
4. What notable events do you associate with any six of the following places: Carham, Alnwick, Largs, Methven, Harlaw, the Castle of St. Andrews, Drumclog, the Isthmus of Darien, Prestonpans?
5. Each of the first five Scottish kings of the name of James died in tragic circumstances. Tell briefly the fate of each, adding dates where you can.
6. Show the influence upon Queen Mary’s fortunes of (a) her residence in France, and (b) her marriage to Darnley.
7. Explain why the Scots fought against Charles I. at Marston Moor and for Charles II. at Dunbar and Worcester.
8. What events led to the Union of the Parliaments of England and Scotland in 1707? Why was it unpopular in Scotland?
9. Select any two of the following characters, and tell (a) in which of his novels or poems Sir Walter Scott has described each of the two characters you have selected, and (b) what impression he has given you of each of the two: James IV.; James VI.; Claverhouse; Prince Charles Edward Stuart.
10. Give some account of any two of the following: Ahab, Nebuchadnezzar, Solon, Philip of Macedon, Quintus Fabius Cunctator, Mark Antony, Charlemagne, Wycliffe, Joan of Arc, Luther, Sir Philip Sidney, Walpole, Lord Shaftesbury, Mazzini.
11. On what occasions were any four of the following expressions used, or to what persons or events do they refer? (a) A sair sanct for the Crown. (b) It cam wi’ a lass and it will gang wi’ a lass. (c) When Adam delved and Eve span, Who was then the gentleman? (d) If I had served my God as I have served my king, he would not have deserted me in my old age. (e) Take away that bauble! (f) I believe that I can save this country and that nobody else can. (g) It is magnificent, but it is not war. (h) I bring you peace with honour.
12. What parts of the British Isles were conquered (a) by the Romans, and (b) by the Danes? What traces of each of these conquests are left?
13. Why is the name of Edward I. of England important in the history of (a) Scotland, and (b) Wales?
14. What parts were played in the Wars of the Roses by (a) Queen Margaret, (b) Warwick the King Maker, and (c) Henry VII.?
15. Why is Queen Elizabeth’s reign regarded as one of the greatest reigns in English history?
16. How did it come about that (a) English troops fought in the Netherlands under Marlborough, and (b) British troops fought in Spain under Wellington?
17. Describe briefly the part played by the British Navy in the Napoleonic Wars.
18. Give some account of the main changes that took place in the political geography of the Balkan Peninsula from 1820 to 1913.

LOWER GRADE
(1915)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1a. Insert in their proper places the following names: River Meuse, Sumatra, Malta, River Senegal, River Colorado, Somaliland, Desert of Gobi, River Darling, Dardanelles.
1b. Show by dots the positions of the following towns and write the name of each close to the dot: Warsaw, Rio de Janeiro, Zanzibar, Hong Kong, Adelaide, Walfisch Bay, Dunkirk, Benares, Chicago.
1c. The positions of five towns, a, b, c, d, e, are shown on the map. State the approximate longitude and latitude of each, and give the names of the towns.
2a. Insert in their proper places the following names: South Downs, Hawick, Lough Neagh, Grimsby, Montrose, Snowdon, Wexford, Lincoln, Airdrie, River Barrow.
2b. Show by shading the principal Scottish coal-fields. Insert in each the name of one town engaged in the coal-mining industry, and the name of one port of export.
2c. Draw the route followed by one of the main railway lines between Edinburgh and London. Mark four important towns along the line in addition to the termini. Measure the distance between Edinburgh and London along the railway line, and write your answer along the line.
3. How far has the geographical position of the following towns exercised an appreciable influence on their history or their industrial development: Perth, London, Carlisle?
4. In what parts of the United Kingdom are the following manufactures chiefly carried on: cotton, linen, woollen? Select one of the districts and show what advantages it possesses for the manufacture named.
5. Contrast the position and natural wealth of the plains of Scotland with those of the plains of Ireland, and show how the difference has affected the development of the agriculture and industries of the two countries.
6. Draw a sketch map of the Iberian Peninsula. Indicate high ground by shading. Insert and name the principal rivers and six of the chief towns.
7a. When it is noon at a place P it is 2.20 p.m. at Greenwich. What is the longitude of P?
7b. In 1895 Nansen reached Latitude 86½° N. How many miles was he from the North Pole?
8. Describe briefly the position, physical features and climate of any one of the following countries, and show how these things affect the manner of life of its inhabitants: Holland, Japan, Egypt, Argentina, New Zealand.
9. What geographical discoveries are connected with the following names: The Cabots, Vasco da Gama, Captain Cook, Mungo Park, Marco Polo? Give a fuller account of any one of these explorers.

HIGHER GRADE
(1915)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following: (a) Autumn in Scotland. (b) Westminster Abbey. (c) Discuss, in the form of a dialogue between a Scotsman and an Englishman, the character and policy of Edward I. of England. (d) Should boys and girls follow the same curriculum in school?
2a. Bring out quite briefly, in your own words, the leading thought of each of the three paragraphs in the following passage.
2b. Explain as many of the historical and geographical allusions as you can.
3. Select from the above passage examples of (a) Metaphor; (b) Simile; (c) the use of Synonyms; (d) Rhetorical Question; (e) Antithesis. In each case add a very brief note on the effect of the figure employed.
4a. Reproduce in modern English prose, adding short notes on the form, meaning or accentuation of the words in italics.
4b. Give the precise meaning of the following words as used in the passage set in Question 2, adding the derivation where you can: exotic, embellished, isolated, chivalric, usurped, peninsula, annihilation, inundation, edifices, memento.
5. Of what plays of Shakespeare are these the heroines: Juliet, Portia, Rosalind, Beatrice, Miranda? Compare any two of these characters carefully; indicate your own preference, and bring out what you think Shakespeare admired in woman.
6. Write a comment on the following sonnet on Milton, explaining the allusions to his life and writings.
7. “English poetry is full of the colour and odour of the sea.” How far does this seem to you to be true? Illustrate your answer from your own reading of English poetry.
8. Discuss and illustrate the humour of any one of the following authors: Addison, Swift, Burns, Goldsmith, Lamb, Jane Austen, Dickens.
9. “Scott’s minor characters are often more interesting than his heroes and heroines.” Discuss and illustrate.
10. Give a brief account of the matter and the style of any one of the following: Keats’s Eve of St. Agnes; Tennyson’s Palace of Art; Arnold’s Sohrab and Rustum; Carlyle’s Essay on Burns; Macaulay’s Essay on Warren Hastings; George Eliot’s Silas Marner.

HIGHER GRADE
(1915)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1a. Explain carefully the meaning of any six of the following terms: Amnesty, Arbitration, Armistice, Conscription, Contraband of War, Devolution, Ecumenical Council, Federal Republic, Hague Tribunal, Parliamentary Opposition, Representative Government, Trial by Jury.
1b. What is meant by “Local Government”? Illustrate your answer by reference to the duties and powers of County Councils, Town Councils, Parish Councils.
2. Discuss the part played in English and Scottish religious history by (a) St. Columba, (b) St. Augustine, and (c) John Wycliffe.
3. What reasons are there for regarding (a) Alfred, (b) William I., and (c) Edward III. as great English kings?
4. Discuss the view that the Franco-Scottish alliance was a benefit to France but a curse to Scotland.
5. What were the grounds, and what the main consequences, of the hostility of England to Spain in the time of the Tudors?
6. “Strafford, Montrose, Clarendon, renegades from the cause of liberty, became alike the apostles of tyranny.” Criticise this verdict.
7. Trace the course of events which led to the revolt of the American Colonies. What causes mainly contributed to the ultimate success of the colonists?
8. What social and economic changes made Parliamentary Reform necessary in England and Scotland in the beginning of the 19th century, and how was it brought about?
9. Explain the value of an Atlas to the student of history, and illustrate your answer from the Napoleonic wars.
10. Give a brief account of any two of the following: The relations between Greece and Persia in the 5th century B.C.; the importance of Sparta at the close of the Peloponnesian War; the rise of Macedonia; Greek colonization.
11. Of what value to a student of ancient history is a knowledge of the writings of either Homer or Horace?
12. Give a brief account of any two of the following: The growth of Roman power before the second Punic War; Caesar’s conquest of Gaul; the career of Cicero; Roman power in Judea up to the siege of Jerusalem; Roman education.
13. Illustrate, either from the Italian peninsula or from the British Isles, the influence of geography upon history.
14. Criticise one of the following statements: (a) From the reign of Henry II. to the reign of Henry VIII. the English were always unprovoked aggressors in France. (b) The greatest misfortune of medieval Europe was the intervention of the Emperors in the affairs of Italy. (c) The spirit of nationality was destroyed by the Reformation and did not revive until the time of Napoleon.
15. Illustrate the importance of the Papacy in the time of Gregory VII. or of Innocent III.
16. Give a short account of any two of the following: The Conciliar movement; the decline of Venice; the rivalry of Francis I. and Charles V.; the policy of Richelieu; the career of Charles XII. of Sweden.
17. Trace the growth of British dominion in India in the 19th century.
18. What were the real causes of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71? What was the actual occasion of the outbreak? Tell briefly the chief events of the campaign.
19. Trace the relations between Great Britain and Turkey during the reign of Queen Victoria.

HIGHER GRADE
(1915)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1a. What is the average gradient of such a road?
1b. Under what type of sea-inlets would Loch Brittle be classified? Under what type of sea-inlets would Loch Coruisk be classified? Give reasons.
1c. Knowing that this map represents part of Skye, what inferences would you draw as to the probable vegetation and fauna; the occupations of the inhabitants, density of the population, and summer recreations of the boys?
1d. Complete these contour lines and insert in Fig. 2 contour lines from 50 feet to 500 feet with a contour interval of 50 feet.
2. Explain the phenomenon of twilight. Why is twilight of longer duration in high latitudes than in low? Why has Scotland no real night at midsummer?
3. Write notes on any two of the following: cycle of erosion, raised-beach, hanging valley, rift valley.
4. Select any one of the great natural regions (e.g., tundra, coniferous forest, savannah, tropical forest, &c.), and describe the animal life of the region from the point of view of adaptation to environment.
5. Give an account of the climate of any district with which you are personally familiar. Refer to prevailing winds, mean temperatures in summer and winter, annual rainfall, and the relations between climatic factors and the physical features of the district.
6. Comment on this statement in such a way as to bring out the influence of the geographical factors that were operative.
7. Write a short essay on the iron and steel industry of the United Kingdom. State the districts where the industry is localised, the advantages possessed by these districts, the migrations of the industry and their causes, the reasons why places not on coalfields (e.g., Birmingham) are able to flourish, and any other relevant matter.
8. Select one of the following continents: North America, Africa, South America. Describe the vegetation belts that would be encountered in traversing the continent from north to south. Illustrate by a sketch map.
9. Write a short essay on one of the following subjects: (a) The effects upon geographical discovery of the rise of the Mohammedan power; (b) Arctic exploration in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; (c) Prince Henry the Navigator; (d) The quest for the sources of the Nile; (e) The limits of the ancient world as known to a cultured Roman of the first century of our era.
