LOWER GRADE
(1916)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following subjects: The care of pets. The benefit of being trained as a boy or girl scout. A dream. A visit to a picture gallery.
2. Read the following poem very carefully, at least twice, from beginning to end. Then, from the material there supplied, write out in your own words the story of Ellen of Lorn, arranging the various incidents in their chronological order.
3. Explain the precise meaning of the following words as used in the above poem, and add in each case another word from the same root: sire, kinsmen, hoar, barbarous, traitor. Give a detailed analysis of the first four lines. Describe the metre in which the poem is written, and mark the feet and stresses in the last stanza.
4. Explain the meaning, and give (if you can) the origin of the following: “Lilliputian,” “forbidden fruit,” “to have one’s pound of flesh,” “an Open Sesame,” “a village Hampden.” Write a short note applying for a post as a clerk, typist, or apprentice, or for admission to a School of Art or a School of Domestic Science. State your qualifications and the reasons for your choice.
5. What is there interesting or dramatic in the life of any one of the following authors? What are some of his chief works?: Spenser, Sidney, Milton, Goldsmith, Scott, Shelley. What poems begin with these lines? Name the authors, and give a full account of one of the poems, with quotations. Take any one of these; name the novel of which he is the hero; and describe very shortly the kind of experiences through which he passes, and the effect they have on his character, making him wiser or braver or more charitable, etc.

LOWER GRADE
(1916)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Place the following events in the century appropriate to each on the accompanying table: The battle of Harlaw; the battle of Crecy; the Scottish Reformation; the First Crusade; the battle of the Standard; the discovery of America; the career of Thomas Chalmers; the battle of Brunanburh; the Indian Mutiny; the Thirty Years’ War; Magna Charta; the Synod of Whitby; the career of John Wycliffe; the career of Frederick the Great; the Great Fire of London; the battle of Sheriffmuir.
2. Explain briefly the connection between the Spanish Armada and the Revolt of the Netherlands; between the Revolution of 1688 and the War of the Spanish Succession; between the Industrial Revolution and the First Reform Bill.
3. Why are St. Columba and Margaret, wife of Malcolm Canmore, famous in Scottish history?
4. Name two battles fought near Stirling, and two battles fought near Edinburgh. State briefly why these battles were fought and what results followed from them.
5. Contrast the characters and careers of James I. of Scotland and James III. of Scotland, and give some account of the rebellions against them.
6. Why are the reigns of Alexander III. and James IV. regarded as the most prosperous in Scottish history?
7. Name six Scottish monasteries. What part was played by the monks in the life of the Middle Ages?
8. Trace the part played by the Argyll family in Scottish history from 1638 to 1715.
9. Name two famous historical characters depicted by Scott in each of the following works: Marmion, The Fair Maid of Perth, The Fortunes of Nigel. Give a brief account of any scene in any one of these works in which one of the Royal Stuarts plays a part.
10. Give some account of any two of the following: Joshua, Darius, Pericles, Hannibal, Cicero, the Emperor Tiberius, Alfred the Great, Saladin, Warwick the King Maker, Drake, Gustavus Adolphus, Lord Nelson, Garibaldi, Lord Roberts.
11. On what occasions were any four of the following expressions used; or to what persons or events do they refer?: I have spoiled my good battle-axe. I am your King, I will be your leader. The key shall keep the castle and the bracken-bush the cow. Presbytery agreeth as well with a King as God with the Devil. Thorough. I have no wish to go again on my travels. George, be a King. We are conquering Canada on the plains of Germany.
12. In what circumstances did Canute and William I. come to occupy the throne of England?
13. Write a short account of Simon de Montfort and the Black Prince.
14. When and how did the English lose possession of Normandy and Calais?
15. In what circumstances did the following Kings of England lose their thrones: Richard II., Richard III., James II.?
16. Trace the career of Oliver Cromwell from the battle of Naseby to his death.
17. In what ways did Lord Clive, Warren Hastings, and Lord Dalhousie extend the British dominion in India?
18. What did Napoleon mean by describing Great Britain as the most dangerous of his enemies?
19. Illustrate the importance of railways in trade and in war.
20. Give some account of any two of the following: Florence Nightingale, Lord Shaftesbury, Lord Lister, Lord Kelvin, Sir Edwin Landseer, Michael Faraday, Charles Darwin.

LOWER GRADE
(1916)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of the World: Insert in their proper places the following names: River Yukon, Lake Baikal, Tunis, Falkland Is., Caucasus, St. Helena, Orinoco, Fujiyama, Euphrates. Show by dots the positions of the following towns, and print the name of each close to the dot: Genoa, Bulawayo, Mecca, Quito, Riga, Madras, Pietermaritzburg, Cincinnati, Auckland. Draw five meridians (lines of longitude) passing through all places that have the following times, and insert in its proper place the name of one town on or close to each meridian.
2. On the accompanying map of the British Isles: Insert in their proper places the following names, indicating the exact position of towns by a dot: Limerick (town), Oban, Brighton, Mourne Mts., Hartlepool, Iona, Chiltern Hills, Dunfermline, Windermere. Print “wheat,” “fruit,” “potatoes,” “dairy produce” over districts specially noted for these things. Indicate by a line the quickest route by rail and sea between London and Dublin, between Carlisle and Belfast, between Glasgow and Stornoway. Insert the names of these towns and of the ports of embarkation and debarkation.
3. Draw a sketch map of the basin of the River Thames. Insert and name the main tributaries, the chief hill ridges, and the most important towns.
4. Give a short geographical description of the county in which your school is situated. Arrange your answer under these headings: relief, climate, natural vegetation, crops, and industries.
5. Contrast the main occupations of the people in N.E. Ireland with those of the people in S.W. Ireland. Explain as far as you can the geographical influences that have favoured the development of the various occupations.
6. Imagine that you are about to make a journey by rail from Halifax (N.S.) to Vancouver (B.C.). Describe the route, the types of scenery, and the products of the districts you would pass through.
7. The following table gives mean temperatures for two places that are approximately in the same latitude. Discuss and account for the striking contrast in the climate of the two places.
8. Write a short account of the situation, the character, the circumstances which favour the growth, the economic importance of the woodlands of Brazil, or Australia, or New Zealand.
9. Write a short essay on one of the following subjects: The North-West Passage; the Exploration of Australia; Drake’s Voyages; South Polar Exploration.

HIGHER GRADE
(1916)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following: The physical appearance and what seems to you the character and spirit of any famous city you have visited or read about. Compare these ideals of life—retirement and tranquillity, or adventure and fame. Take up the story at this point, and describe the meeting as dramatically as you can, so as to bring out the conflict of feelings in father and daughter.
2. Give shortly in your own words the thought of the above poem, making clear the significance of the allusions. Indicate the figurative expressions by which Wordsworth makes his thought vivid and moving.
3. Analyse the metrical form of the poem given in Question 2. Are you acquainted with any other varieties of this form? If so, describe them.
4. Parse the words italicised in the following quotations, adding in each case a note upon the idiom: And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon. Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt and his fruit corrupt. Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near. Whether of them twain did the will of his father? The powers that be are ordained of God. Give the meaning of the words italicised in the following, and indicate something of the history of each: The sanguine sunrise, with his meteor eyes, And his burning plumes outspread. So now, Livesey, come post; do not lose an hour if you respect me. My chief humour is for a tyrant. Nice customs courtesy to great kings. Tell me, what one character of liberty the Americans have.
5. How has Chaucer described the knight in The Prologue? Compare Chaucer’s knight with other descriptions of the knightly character either by Spenser or by Tennyson.
6. Discuss the thought and the form (construction, diction, metre) of one of the following: Prothalamion; Lycidas; The Bard; Ode on Intimations of Immortality; Ode on a Grecian Urn; The Scholar Gipsy.
7. A favourite theme of comedy is the exposure of the boaster, the correction of the affected, the defeat of the hypocrite. Illustrate any one of these motives from the works of Shakespeare, or Sheridan, or Dickens, or Jane Austen, or Thackeray, or other well-known author.
8. Is it true that women characters play a greater part in Shakespeare’s comedies than in his tragedies? If so, how is it to be accounted for?
9. What are the essentials of a good biography? Illustrate from any famous biography that you have read, naming the author and his period.
10. What has interested you in the thought and style of one of the following: Gulliver’s Travels; Macaulay’s Essay on Clive; De Quincey’s Opium Eater; Ruskin’s Unto this Last; Carlyle’s Heroes and Hero Worship; Stevenson’s Virginibus Puerisque?

HIGHER GRADE
(1916)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Give two historical examples of each of the following, with dates: Wars of Independence; Wars of Religion; Armed Neutralities; Revolutions; Mutinies; The Discovery of new Countries; The union of two Kingdoms; Federations. Choose one of the following phrases, and tell when it was famous in history and what meaning was attached to it by those who used it: The Divine Right of Kings. No Taxation without Representation. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.
2. About what period did it become possible to speak of “The Kingdom of England” and “The Kingdom of Scotland”? State briefly the stages by which national unity was attained in each case.
3. In the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries the Crown had two great rivals—the Church and the Baronage. How far is this true of either England or Scotland?
4. Narrate the circumstances and events which led up to the fall of the House of Lancaster.
5. Why are the following famous in the history of the Reformation: Henry VIII.; Archbishop Cranmer; John Knox?
6. Give some account of the relations between England and Scotland in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
7. What attempts were made to increase the power of the Crown by Charles I. and George III.?
8. On what grounds may the reign of Queen Anne be regarded as one of the most important in British history?
9. In what circumstances did British forces fight at Acre (1799), Navarino (1829), and Acre (1840)?
10. The British Empire was extended by war in the 18th century, and by peaceful methods in the 19th. How far is this true?
11. Write a sentence or two giving the main facts about five of the following battles, with their dates, and a paragraph giving a fuller account of the remaining one: Thermopylae, Plataea, Sybota, Helium, Arginusae, Leuctra.
12. How far is it true to say that the constitution of Athens rendered it impossible for her to make and keep an Empire?
13. Give a brief account of any two of the following: The Etruscan wars; the career of Fabius Cunctator; the literary relations between Rome and Greece; the conquest of Gaul; the end of the Roman Republic.
14. What claims has Virgil to the title of the Poet of Imperial Rome?
15. Criticise one of the following statements: France produced no great monarch in the Middle Ages. The greatness of Spain was merely the result of the weakness of her rivals. Frederick the Great is rightly regarded as the hero of the 18th century.
16. What were the chief influences that prevented Italy from attaining national unity in the Middle Ages?
17. Illustrate the important part played by Holland and Sweden in European history between 1620 and 1720.
18. Write a brief explanatory note upon any two of the following: the Friars; the Reformation in Germany; the career of John Sobieski; British foreign policy under George I. and George II.; the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815); the Treaty of Berlin (1878).
19. What is the real debt of France to the Great Napoleon?
20. What internal reforms and what military successes made Prussia the leading power in Germany between 1850 and 1869?
21. What were the causes of the Civil War between the Northern and the Southern States in America? How was Great Britain affected by the conflict?

HIGHER GRADE
(1916)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. The map represents part of the North Downs. In the space provided below the map, draw a section from A to B. What light does the section throw on the structure of the North Downs? Show how the directions of the railways and roads round Guildford have been influenced by geographical conditions. Discuss and account for the unequal distribution of the population over the area shown in the map.
2. Illustrate the work of a river, by describing the course of some particular river, from source to sea.
3. Write notes on any two of the following: Mercator’s Projection; scarped lands; anticyclone; the relation between latitude and noon-altitude of sun at the equinoxes.
4. Contrast the rainfall and the mean temperature, in January and in July, of places on the Mediterranean coast and in the interior of Russia. How do you account for the contrast?
5. Describe briefly the methods by which an Ordnance Survey Map, such as accompanies this paper, is constructed.
6. Name four of the most important naval bases in the United Kingdom. Explain the advantages that each possesses.
7. Give an account of the Atlas Mountain region. Describe the physical structure, climate, plants, and animals, in order to show that this region is more akin to Europe than to Africa.
8. Draw a sketch-map of any one of the following countries: Russia in Europe, China, Brazil, New Zealand. Indicate high ground by shading, and insert the chief rivers and not more than six important towns. Draw and number a line of latitude, a line of longitude, and an approximate scale of miles.
9. Comment on any two of the following statements: From a commanding summit in their interior the Highlands of Scotland are seen to differ from any mountain chain such as the Alps, not merely in their inferior elevation, but essentially in their configuration and structure. The merchants of the Middle Ages tried to utilise a natural water-way wherever possible. The conservatism of the Chinese is due in great measure to the profound isolation of their country in former times. Australia has a remarkable structural resemblance to South America; but the arrangement of the parts is reversed. Norway affords an excellent illustration of the influence of geographical conditions on the development of exploration.