LOWER GRADE
(1918)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following: The bravest deed you ever heard or read of; My garden; How I would furnish and decorate a house; A trip in an aeroplane.
2. Read the following four stanzas two or three times; then tell the story in your own words.
3a. Give the exact meanings of the following words as used in the above poem: desperate, horde, pyre, mien, avert.
3b. Give a general and detailed analysis of the following sentence: "If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus’ love for Caesar was no less than his."
4a. Connect up the following simple sentences into two or three well-constructed complex or compound sentences.
4b. Show how to begin and conclude letters to a firm of merchants applying for a situation; to a lady not personally known to you; to a gentleman personally but not intimately known to you; to your headmaster; to a school friend.
5a. Tell, in your own words, with illustrative quotations, the story of any English poem that deals with kindness to animals; with a Border foray; with the fairy world; or with the death of a child.
5b. Choose any one of the following Waverley novels: "The Antiquary," "Guy Mannering," "Rob Roy," "Old Mortality," "Redgauntlet." In what part of Scotland are the chief scenes laid? Recount briefly the hero’s movements from place to place.
5c. What is the best sea-story, or collection of sea-stories, that you know by any one of the following authors: Michael Scott, Marryat, Stevenson, Kipling? Give some account of it, and of what you have learned from it about life at sea.

LOWER GRADE
(1918)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Place the following events in the century appropriate to each: The rebellion of Simon de Montfort; the death of the Emperor Charles V; the landing of St. Augustine; the Treaty of Wedmore; the reign of Malcolm Canmore; the battle of Plassey; the institution of the Danegeld; the Crusade of Richard I; the Thirty Years’ War; the Relief of Lucknow; the Synod of Whitby; the death of Joan of Arc; Magna Charta; the battle of Bannockburn; the birth of Sir Walter Scott; the death of Oliver Cromwell.
2a. State three reasons why Scotland was richer in the nineteenth century than in the eighteenth.
2b. State three reasons why the British Empire must possess a strong navy.
2c. State three causes that contributed to the victory gained by the American Colonies in the eighteenth century.
3. How and when was Scotland converted to Christianity?
4. Draw a rough sketch-map of the Borders, showing the position of the Solway, the River Tweed, and the Cheviot Hills. Mark four places and write a short note about each.
5. Tell the story of Mary, Queen of Scots, from her return to Scotland to her flight to England.
6. Give a short account of the Solemn League and Covenant; the massacre of Glencoe; the Darien Scheme.
7. In what poems or novels does Sir Walter Scott depict the condition of Scotland in the reigns of Robert III or James V; the career of Robert Bruce; the exploits of the Covenanters?
8. Why did the Jacobite party find adherents in Scotland more readily than in England? What attempts did they make to overthrow the house of Hanover, and why did they fail?
9. Name three Scotsmen who did great things for Scotland, and justify your choice of one.
10. Give an account of two of the following: Isaiah, Solon, Pericles, Hannibal, Cicero, Judas Maccabaeus, Alfred the Great, John Calvin, Archbishop Cranmer, Drake, Gustavus Adolphus, Captain Cook, Napoleon III.
11. What circumstances led to the Norman conquest of England, and how far was it fortunate for England?
12. What events in English history are connected with Calais, Agincourt, and Orleans?
13. To what centuries do the inventions of gunpowder, printing, and the steam engine belong? What was the effect of each on Britain?
14. Describe the foreign policy of Queen Elizabeth.
15. Narrate the events leading to the Restoration of 1660 or the Revolution of 1688.
16. How did Great Britain come to possess Cape Colony? Give an account of the growth of British dominion in South Africa.
17. Why did Napoleon describe Great Britain as his principal enemy?
18. Give an account of two of the following: George Canning; Dr. Chalmers; Lord John Russell; Elizabeth Barrett Browning; Lord Tennyson; Lord Wolseley.

LOWER GRADE
(1918)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1a. Insert the following names on a world map: Valdai Hills, River Congo, Atlas Mountains, Arabia, River Tagus, Philippine Islands, Porto Rico, Abyssinia, Vancouver Island.
1b. Mark the positions of Copenhagen, Gaza, Kandy, Teheran, Pretoria, Leghorn, Los Angeles, Havre, Para.
1c. Label the regions where the gorilla, grizzly bear, giraffe, llama, kangaroo, cobra, jaguar, and walrus are native.
2a. Insert the following names on a map of the British Isles: Sidlaw Hills, River Tees, Anglesey, Killarney Lakes, St. George’s Channel, Wicklow Mountains, Loch Linnhe, River Spey.
2b. Mark the positions of Crewe, Cambridge, Plymouth, Peebles, Sunderland, Sligo, Dingwall, Queenstown.
2c. Shade and label the Southern Uplands of Scotland, Cumbrian Mountains, Dartmoor, Ochil Hills, and Mourne Mountains.
3. What are the chief industries of Paisley, Barrow-in-Furness, Ipswich, and Swansea? How does their situation affect these industries?
4. What is the average annual rainfall of your district? Compare it with East Anglia and the English Lakes, explaining the differences.
5. Infer the origin and nature of four of the following place-names: Usk, Inverurie, Lancaster, Whitby, Athelstaneford, Northampton.
6. What geographical advantages made London the most important city in Britain?
7. Explain why the weather is warmer and daylight longer in summer than in winter, using diagrams.
8. Describe the overland journey from London to Cairo via Brindisi, naming principal towns.
9. Describe the Canadian lumbering industry and how natural conditions affect it.
10. Describe the everyday life of the Chinese, Eskimo, Arab, or South Sea Islander, referring to food, clothing, homes, occupations, and transport.
11. What feats of exploration are associated with Livingstone, Amundsen, Franklin, and Magellan? Detail one explorer.

HIGHER GRADE
(1918)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on one of the following: The Arthurian Legends; A League of Peace; The rival attractions of a professional and business career; The future of airships and aeroplanes.
2a. State the main argument of the given passage by John Locke.
2b. Identify and explain the principal metaphors in the passage.
3a. Define the italicized words in the passage and give their derivations.
3b. Identify the origins and meanings of metaphors derived from specific arts or studies.
3c. Write brief notes on the grammar or idiom of italicized words in given sentences.
4. Which characters in Chaucer’s Prologue are connected with the Church? Which does he describe most sympathetically or satirically? What does this reveal about his view of the Church?
5. Show how Shakespeare engages sympathy for the hero of a tragedy and makes his fate seem just.
6. Analyze diction, imagery, or rhythm in three selected passages and assign them to periods and authors.
7. What do Burns’s poems reveal about Scottish life in his day?
8. Analyze plot, character, description, and dialogue in a novel of your choice.
9. Name five chief prose writers of the eighteenth century and give a fuller account of one.
10. Describe an example of imaginary autobiography, travels, history, or commonwealth from English literature.

HIGHER GRADE
(1918)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1i. Write short notes on Forest Laws; the Jews in England; the triumph of the longbow; the capture of treasure ships; the abolition of slavery; the scramble for Africa.
1ii. Explain and illustrate one of the following: "Geography makes History"; "The old order changeth"; "Trade follows the Flag."
2. Which English sovereigns between Alfred and Edward I were foreigners? How did their rule affect institutions, customs, and language?
3. Justify the contrasting views of Edward I as "great and noble" or "tyrant and murderer."
4. Illustrate the importance of sea-power in the reigns of Edward III and George III.
5. Estimate England’s debt to the Tudors or Scotland’s debt to James I and IV.
6. What ecclesiastical problems troubled England between 1603 and 1688? How were they solved under William III and in the nineteenth century?
7. Explain how the British Empire grew at the expense of France, Spain, and Holland between 1701 and 1815.
8. How did inventions alter the iron and cotton industries?
9. Name the three greatest soldiers in British History and justify your choices.
10. Discuss one topic between 1854 and 1914: taxation methods; colonial relations; Egypt and Sudan; travel and communication; care of the sick.
11. Summarize five events in Greek history with dates and detail one: Marathon; ostracism of Aristides; Delian Confederacy; Athenian expedition to Syracuse; retreat of the Ten Thousand; Alexander’s invasion of India.
12. How do Homeric poems and Aristophanes’ plays illuminate Greek History?
13. Describe two of the following: Gaulish invasion of Italy; Rome-Carthage relations before Hannibal; Tiberius Gracchus’ legislation; Cicero’s career; Augustus’ imperial ideals.
14. Assess the statements "Rome was the Britain of the Ancient World" and "Rome was the Prussia of the Ancient World."
15. Illustrate or criticize one statement about medieval Christianity, post-religious wars, the Bastille’s fall, or Britain as protector of small nations.
16. How did France’s greatness depend on its rulers?
17. Explain the decline of Spain’s power.
18. Write notes on two of: Charlemagne’s coronation; John Hus; Francis I vs. Charles V; Hanseatic League; Poland’s misfortunes; Garibaldi.
19. Trace Prussia’s history during the Napoleonic Wars.
20. Why should Alsace and Lorraine belong to France?
21. Discuss U.S. political and economic influence on Europe (1783–1903).

HIGHER GRADE
(1918)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1a. Draw form-lines for a hill and coastal plain based on given elevations.
1b. Contrast two coast-line types and name European examples.
1c. Determine visibility of a road from a hill using elevation data.
2. Explain how pressure centres near Iceland, Azores, and Europe control British weather.
3. Describe how an explorer with a theodolite and chronometer determines latitude and longitude.
4. Explain the origin and development of a river system, using Scottish examples.
5. Describe a geographical excursion you undertook, including observations and conclusions.
6. Identify desert areas in the Old and New Worlds and account for their positions.
7. Describe the Pennines’ relief and their influence on coal-fields and industries.
8. Detail the mineral resources of India, Canada, Australia, or South Africa.
9. Draw a sketch map of Italy, Asia Minor, or South America with towns, latitude, longitude, and scale.
10. Discuss geographical factors in urban growth, using examples.
11. Write an essay on Mungo Park, the North-East Passage, or early circumnavigations.
