LOWER GRADE
(1919)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of these subjects: (a) Our Holiday Camp; (b) A Summer Sunday in a Country Parish; (c) Bees; (d) Describe either a motor-car or an electric tram.
2. Read the passage carefully, and then: (a) Draw a rough plan of the castle, showing the position of the cliffs, the artificial ditch, the offices and stables, the low embattled wall, and the tower; (b) Write a short paragraph describing a view of the castle from the sea—as seen by daylight from the deck of a passing ship.
3. Re-read the passage given in Question 2, and then answer the following questions: (a) What is an eyry? Why is the castle called an eyry? (b) What does “flitting” mean? What has this to do with the view? (c) What is the opposite of “artificial”? What single word might have been used for an artificial ditch defending a castle? (d) Is “encircled” the right word, considering the shape of the court-yard? Suggest a better word. (e) What do the words “sheeted spectre” mean?
4. (a) Give a general analysis of the second sentence of the passage quoted in Question 2; (b) Explain briefly these expressions: “To build on sand”; “casting pearls before swine”; “a Quixotic enterprise”; “a forlorn hope”; “coal-rationing”; (c) Define Personification. Invent a short paragraph personifying Peace.
5. Answer any two of the following four questions: (a) Name five of Wordsworth’s short poems, and describe the subject of each in a single sentence; (b) Choose any two of the novels Ivanhoe, Rob Roy, The Fortunes of Nigel, The Talisman, Kenilworth, and in each of the two chosen name the hero of the love story, name the principal historical character, and show how the former is brought into relation with the latter in the novel; (c) Describe briefly the first scene of any play that you have read, and show how it prepares for the story of the play; (d) What is your favourite collection of fairy stories? How does a fairy story differ from a story of real life? Illustrate from any of your favourites.

LOWER GRADE
(1919)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Place the following events in the century appropriate to each on the accompanying table: The death of Edward I. of England; the accession of Philip II. of Spain; the mission of St. Columba; the struggle of King Alfred with the Danes; the reign of Edward the Confessor; the Porteous Riots; the capture of William the Lion; the accession of Louis XIV. of France; the battle of Inkerman; the battle of Nectansmere; the battle of Agincourt; the battle of Largs; the War of American Independence; the treaty of Northampton; the Scottish Reformation; the career of President Lincoln.
2. State briefly in what circumstances and for what reasons: (a) England and Scotland became more friendly in the 16th century; (b) Colonies were planted in North America in the 17th century; (c) Factory Acts were passed in the 19th century.
3. What parts did (a) Piets, (b) Scots, (c) Angles or Saxons, and (d) Northmen play in the history of Scotland before the reign of Malcolm Canmore?
4. Why was a castle so important in old wars? Name four famous Scottish castles, explaining why the geographical position of each made it historically important.
5. Tell the story of any two of the following battles, explaining why each of the two was fought and indicating its most important effects on Scottish history: Carham, Stirling Bridge, Killiecrankie, Culloden.
6. Give a short account of any two of the following: The reasons for the flight of Queen Mary into England; the Bishops’ Wars; the conditions on which the Parliaments of Scotland and England were united.
7. In what poems or novels does Sir Walter Scott depict any two of the following: The reign of James IV.; the Scottish Reformation; the ’45; the civil war in the time of Montrose; Border feuds? Give a brief account of what you have read in Scott’s writings about the two subjects you select.
8. What causes (a) helped and (b) retarded the growth of Scottish prosperity in the 18th century?
9. How was the Parliamentary franchise in Scotland affected (a) by the Reform Act of 1832, (b) by the Representation of the People Act of 1918?
10. Give some account of any two of the following: Moses, Lycurgus, Alexander the Great, Coriolanus, Pompey the Great, Charlemagne, St. Augustine, Henry V. of England, Cardinal Wolsey, Louis XIV. of France, Lord Clive, Dr. Johnson.
11. Tell how any three of the following kings of England came to die a violent death: William II., Richard I., Edward II., Edward V., Richard III.
12. What events in the history of England are connected with any three of the following places: Jaffa, Sluys, Poitiers, Cadiz, Zutphen?
13. Give some account of the growth and development of any two of the following: The woollen industry, the iron industry, the Poor Law, Elementary Education.
14. How did James VI. come to be King of England as well as of Scotland? Give reasons for his unpopularity with the English people.
15. Write notes on any three of the following: Ship Money, the Protectorate of Richard Cromwell, the Popish Plot, the beginnings of the National Debt, the Treaty of Utrecht.
16. Why did the North American colonies break away from Great Britain?
17. From what various dangers did (a) Nelson and (b) Wellington save this country?
18. Give some account of any two of the following: Sir Robert Peel, Sir Henry Lawrence, Florence Nightingale, Lord Macaulay, Dr. Livingstone, General Gordon.

LOWER GRADE
(1919)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of the world: (a) Print in their proper places the following names: Florida, Australian Alps, Sandwich Islands, Pamirs, Formosa, River Irawady, Uganda, River Orinoco, Korea, Yucatan; (b) Mark the position of the following towns with a dot, and print the name of each town close to the dot: Port Said, Adelaide, Valparaiso, Mombasa, Naples, Damascus, Archangel, Aden, Bombay, Durban; (c) Draw a short line to show the position of the following, and mark each line with the initial letter of the appropriate proper name: Kiel Canal, Dardanelles, Strait of Belle Isle, Panama Canal, Strait of Magellan, Suez Canal.
2. On the accompanying map of the British Isles: (a) Mark the position of each town of the following pairs of towns with a dot, and print the name of each town close to the dot: Belfast and Ardrossan, Dublin and Holyhead, Cork and Bristol; Draw a straight line between each pair of ports, calculate the distance between the two, and write the result along the line; (b) Name on the map the rivers Clyde, Nith, Tweed, and Teviot; Draw one main railway route either from Edinburgh to Carlisle or from Glasgow to Carlisle, with careful reference to the river valleys, and mark and name one intermediate station; (c) Show by light shading one small area specially noted for the production of each of the following: Raspberries, flax, granite, hops, slate. Write the name of each product over its special area.
3. Name two Scottish manufacturing industries of general importance; state the area or areas in which each is chiefly carried on, and explain why each area is specially fitted to its particular industry.
4. Illustrate by an account of the country through which flow the River Forth and its tributaries the meaning of the saying: “Forth bridles the wild Highlander.” Write a note on the town of Stirling, showing its importance in this connection.
5. Describe briefly the climate of (a) South-West Ireland; (b) East Anglia; (c) Ayrshire, and show how the climate in each case affects the occupations of the people and the produce of the land.
6. Where do (1) coal and (2) iron chiefly occur in England? What special advantages of position do the English coalfields possess?
7. Make a sketch-map of a coral atoll, showing the reef and the lagoon. Draw also a section across your map to indicate the difference in the depth of the water on the two sides of the reef. Write a short description of an atoll, explaining what kind of plants you would expect to find there and what kinds of food are available for the inhabitants.
8. Give some account of South Africa, or of Italy, or of Japan, or of New Zealand (one country only), under the headings of (a) scenery; (b) products; (c) occupations of the people.
9. Name one part of the world outside Europe in which wheat, sugar, cotton, tobacco are respectively produced on a large scale (one area for each product). In the case of one product, explain why the region named is specially suited to that crop.
10. Select any two of the following rivers: Rhine, Rhone, Volga, Danube. Describe briefly the course of the two rivers selected, name two important towns situated on each, and state why these towns are important.
11. On a ship crossing the Atlantic from Queenstown to New York the time shown on its clocks is altered every day at noon. Why is this done? If the ship moves from east to west 10 geographical miles per hour, by how much, and in which direction, would the hands of its clocks require to be moved each day? Why? Would a traveller also require to move the hands of his watch in a trans-continental railway journey from New York to San Francisco?

HIGHER GRADE
(1919)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following subjects: (a) “Peace hath her victories no less renowned than War”; (b) It is said that boys and girls no longer read Scott. Do you think, from your own experience, that this is true? If it is true, is there any explanation of this neglect, and what grounds (if any) are there for regretting it? (c) What might the history of Scotland have been if the Crowns and Parliaments of England and Scotland had not been united? (d) Women’s careers in the future.
2. Read the poem carefully, and then answer the following questions: (a) Relate in a few plain sentences the bare facts narrated in the poem; (b) What are the most impressive features in the scene described in the third and fourth stanzas? (c) What deep meaning did Wordsworth see in the story of the man and his dog that caused him to turn it into poetry? (d) Why does not the poet at once say definitely that it was a bark? (e) What do you infer as to the aspect of the cove? (f) How does the fourth stanza differ from the others in its structure as a stanza and in its diction? (g) What change does this make in the picture?
3. (a) If you were telling the story in plain prose, what words or expressions would you substitute for each of these: tarn, bosom, cheer, symphony, austere, boding, abrupt, nigh, nourished, estimate? (b) Select ten of these words and say what circumstances in British or European history explain their appearance in English at these particular times: street (5), apostle (7), mutton (12), damask (13), Parliament (13), melancholy (14), mercurial (14), alembic (15), species (15), alligator (16), Puritan (16), cabinet (17), cabal (17), premier (18), aristocrat (18), co-operative (19), imperialism (19), commandeer (19), camouflage (20).

HIGHER GRADE
(1919)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. (i) Mention one person famous in British History whose name you associate with each of the following: Religious Toleration; Privileges of the House of Commons; Reform of the Criminal Law; the Colonization of North America; African Exploration; the Utilization of Steam Power. In each instance, write a note of about three lines explaining the nature of the association; (ii) Explain, with illustrations, what is meant by any one of the following: (a) Local Government; (b) Federation; (c) Preferential Trade.
2. Illustrate the influence of the Church in the political and social history of either England or Scotland up to the year 1215.
3. Contrast the character and ambitions of Edward I. with those of Edward III.
4. Compare the causes of discontent in England in the reign of Richard II. and in the period 1815-1832.
5. Give some account of the circumstances in which the Great Barons either in England or in Scotland ceased to be a danger to the peace of the realm, referring in either case to the parallel movement in France.
6. What does the Reformation in Great Britain owe (a) to Luther and (b) to Calvin?
7. How far is it true to say that the English Constitution was changed from an arbitrary to a limited monarchy between 1603 and 1690, and to what causes do you ascribe this development?
8. Give some account of any two of the following: The political aims and ideals of John Milton; the commercial policy of Walpole; the impulse given to industry by Arkwright; the government of India in the time of Warren Hastings.
9. What were the gravest dangers that menaced this country and the British Empire either in the years 1776-1783 or in the years 1793-1805, and how far were they overcome?
10. Discuss one of the following topics: (a) “In the history of England and Great Britain, the most fortunate reigns have been those of Queens”; (b) “The work of social reform has chiefly consisted in attempts to remove the social evils brought about by the Industrial Revolution”; (c) “The British Empire is no Empire but a League of Nations.”
11. Give a brief account of any two of the following: The origins of the Greek nation; the place of the “Tyrants” in Greek history; the Persian Wars; the Constitution of Cleisthenes; the invasion of Xerxes; the career of Pericles; the decline of the power of Athens; the rise of Thebes.
12. Illustrate the political influence and importance of oratory in ancient Greece.
13. Write a short essay on one of the following subjects: (a) The influence of Greece upon the Romans; (b) The influence of ancient Rome upon modern Europe.
14. Give a short sketch of the career of any two of the following: Tarquin the Elder; Hannibal; Scipio Africanus the Younger; Sulla; Pompey the Great; Antony; the Emperor Augustus.
15. What events or dates do you suggest as most conveniently marking (a) the beginning and (b) the end of one of the following: The Dark Ages; the Renaissance; the Reformation; the ascendancy of France under the Bourbons? State your reasons for your choice, and indicate any possible alternative events or dates.
16. Illustrate and explain the hostility of the Papacy towards the Empire in the Middle Ages.
17. Sketch the history of the extension of European Power since the 15th century either to South America or to North and Central Africa.
18. Write a brief explanatory note on any two of the following: The partitions of the Empire of Charlemagne; the exploits of the Normans before they invaded England; the Great Schism; the reign of Philip II. of Spain; the rise of Sweden as a European Power; the history of Austria from 1648 to 1763; the effect of the French Revolution on domestic politics in Great Britain.
19. Give some account of the principles, and the results, of the settlement of Europe either in 1815 or in 1878.
20. What changes took place in the form of government in France between 1830 and 1871? What were the circumstances leading up to each change?
21. What were the causes of the Civil War in the United States of America (1861-1865)? Illustrate your answer by reference to American poetry or fiction dealing with the causes of quarrel.

HIGHER GRADE
(1919)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. The accompanying map of the British Isles shows corrected barometric readings at certain stations the morning after a great storm. Draw on the map isobars at every tenth of an inch from 28.9 in. to 29.7 in. inclusive, and write the word low over the area of lowest pressure on the map. Describe briefly the distribution of pressure as shown on the map, and suggest a reason for the fact that the storm of the previous day was especially felt off Land’s End and South-West Ireland. The sketch-map shows a Scottish sea-loch, the dotted lines indicating depths of 100 and 150 feet below sea-level: (a) Point out the peculiarities of the depth conditions, and show on the map the probable course of the 50-ft. depth contour; (b) Compare the gradient of the coach-road between the points A. and B with that of the footpath between C and D; (c) Calculate the height of the peak and write the result close to X; (d) Mark, by clusters of dots, three areas which seem to you suitable sites for villages, numbering them I, II, III, and add in your examination-book a brief statement of your reasons in each case.
2. The island of Sicily and the state of Virginia are in approximately the same latitude, but there is a marked difference in climate. Describe shortly the climate of each area, account for the differences, and show how these differences are reflected in differences in natural vegetation and cultivated crops.
3. Draw up a detailed programme of a two-days’ walking tour, the object of which is the study of the geography of some part of Scotland. State how you propose to reach your starting point from your school, how you mean to return, and the precise observations you hope to make. Illustrate by a diagram or rough sketch-map of the area to be visited.
4. Throughout much of England the rocks are geologically younger than those of Scotland. Make clear, by a comparison of a characteristic English area of younger rocks with a characteristic Scottish area of older rocks, the effects of this difference on relief, scenery, and the uses to which the land is put.
5. Describe the zones of vegetation found in travelling from Northern Canada and Northern Russia to the southern border of the country in each case, explaining to what extent it is true that the zones correspond in the two regions. Add a note on the inhabitants and their occupations in the most northerly zone of each country.
6. Give some account of six of the more important land animals of the New World, distinguishing those that are native from those that have been introduced from Europe. Indicate some of the reasons why the latter were introduced, and why they have thriven in various parts of the continent.
7. Draw a sketch-map of the Black Sea with the Sea of Azov and the connection with the Mediterranean. Show by shading the relief of the surrounding area, and mark and name the mouths of the great rivers entering the two seas. Mark and name also four important ports, insert the terminal segment of a great railway trunk entering each, and write at the end of each railway line the name of the area with which it is connected. Insert also the meridian of 30° E.
8. Discuss the chief ways in which goods can be transported at present in the interior of Africa, and indicate the relation of each method of transport to the relief, climate, and economic and other conditions in the different parts of the continent.
9. State the exact position and explain the importance of the following towns: Jerusalem, Baghdad, Aleppo, Damascus. Illustrate by a sketch-map.
10. Describe the course of the main Caledonian railway route from Aberdeen to Carlisle, and show clearly how its course is determined by the relief of the country traversed. Illustrate your answer by a sketch-map.
11. What were the motives which inspired the efforts made in the fifteenth century to find a seaway to India? Give, with brief notes, the names of two of the most famous navigators of the period. What was the first effect of the discovery of the seaway on trade in Europe?
