LOWER GRADE
(1920)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following subjects: (a) Hallowe’en. (b) My earliest recollections. (c) The story of the Spanish Armada, as it might have been related by a Spanish sailor who had been with it throughout, and had at last got back to Spain. (d) Some spring flowers.
2. Read the following poem carefully, and then answer the questions appended: (a) Describe the scene, briefly but exactly, in your own words. Begin thus: “One evening a number of men were sitting round a camp-fire.” (b) Where do you think the scene is laid? Why do you think so? (c) Were the men around the camp-fire soldiers? If not, what were they? Give reasons for your answer. (d) If the heading had told you nothing about the author of the poem, or the author of the book that was read by the camp-fire, what would you have gathered from the poem itself? (e) In what respects is it suggested that the fir-trees were like the men around the fire, and the men like the fir-trees?
3. (a) Give the precise meaning of the following expressions, as used in the above poem: “dim Sierras”; “minarets of snow”; “his pack’s scant treasure hands of listless leisure”; “some spell divine.” (b) Parse “Sierras” and “far” in line 3 of the above poem. Point out and explain the force of the prefix or suffix in each of the following words: “anew” (line 12), “twilight” (line 14), “gusty” (last line). (c) The opposite of “a natural barrier” is “an artificial barrier.” In each of the following phrases substitute for the italicised word a word which means just the opposite: a rare plant; a temporary assistant; an imaginary conversation; a trivial reason; the former alternative; the initial cost; passive resistance; gradual improvement; an absolute monarchy; an accidental blow. (d) Show how you would write the name and designation on an envelope addressed to each of the following: (1) A private gentleman. (2) A clergyman. (3) A business firm. (4) A young man living with his father whose Christian name is the same. (5) A schoolboy.
4. Answer any two of the following: (a) What two characters in Scott or what two in Stevenson might be taken as representing a typical Highlander and a typical Lowlander? Name the novel or novels in which they occur, and tell why you think each of the two typical. (b) Name five poems or ballads which deal with famous incidents in British history. In each case name the author (if known), and the period in which the poem or ballad was composed. Give a fuller account of any one of the five poems or ballads. (c) Parable. Fable. Allegory. What is meant by each of these terms? Give one example of each, and say what it illustrates. (d) From any play or story that you know select the scene which struck you as the most humorous or the most pathetic; describe it briefly, and tell why it struck you as specially humorous or pathetic.

LOWER GRADE
(1920)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Place the following events in the century appropriate to each on the accompanying table: The Reign of Malcolm Canmore; the Synod of Whitby; the Defence of Lucknow; the Third Crusade; the rebellion of Monmouth; the Black Death; the death of John Knox; the landing of St. Augustine; the battle of Stirling Bridge; the South Sea Bubble; the battle of Poitiers; the Capture of Quebec; the revolt of the Netherlands; the battle of Sedan; the death of Cromwell; the battle of Sauchieburn.
2. (a) Who was King of Scots in the reign of Richard I. of England? (b) What King of England captured James I. of Scotland? (c) Who was King of England at the date of the battle of Flodden? (d) Who was King of France during the reign of Queen Anne? (e) Who was King of Prussia at the time of the Seven Years’ War? (f) Who was Emperor of the French at the time of the Crimean War?
3. What part was played in Scottish history by (a) St. Columba, (b) Macbeth, (c) the Black Douglas?
4. Why was Stirling a more important place than Glasgow in the Middle Ages? When and how did Glasgow become the largest of Scottish cities?
5. State briefly the most important events of any two of the following reigns—David II., James II., James IV., Mary Queen of Scots.
6. Give a short account of any two of the following: the career of Andrew Melville; the attempt of the Scots to restore Charles II. in 1650-51; the “Killing Time”; the causes of the failure of Prince Charles Edward in 1745-46.
7. In what poems or novels does Sir Walter Scott depict any one of the following: the Scottish War of Independence; the career of the Duke of Rothesay; the character of James V.; the Regency of Murray? Give a brief account of what you have read in Scott’s writings about the subject you select.
8. What do you know of the condition of the Highlands (a) before and (b) after the Jacobite Rebellion of 1745?
9. Tell the story of the Disruption of 1843.
10. Give some account of any two of the following: King Saul, Solon, Pericles, Hannibal, the Emperor Augustus, Mahomet, the Black Prince, Protector Somerset, Gustavus Adolphus, Peter the Great, Captain Cook.
11. What were the causes of civil war in England (a) under Stephen and (b) under Henry VI.?
12. What events in the history of England are connected with any three of the following: Tenchebrai, Calais, Agincourt, Virginia, La Rochelle, Jamaica?
13. At what period did the English become a seafaring nation? Tell anything you know about English seamen in the time of the Tudors.
14. How did Charles I. make enemies in England? Tell briefly the causes of the outbreak of the great Civil War.
15. Write notes on any three of the following: Declaration of Breda; the Clarendon Code; the Trial of the Seven Bishops; the capture of Gibraltar; the policy of Walpole.
16. Tell briefly how British power came to be established either in Canada or in India.
17. Explain how it came about that Spain fought against Britain at Trafalgar, and Britain fought on behalf of Spain in the Peninsular War. Tell the story of the Peninsular War up to the battle of Corunna.
18. Give some account of any two of the following: James Watt, George Canning, Richard Cobden, Sir Colin Campbell (Lord Clyde), Benjamin Disraeli (Lord Beaconsfield), General Botha.

LOWER GRADE
(1920)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 3
1. On the accompanying map of the World: (a) Draw the following parallels, and print the appropriate name along each: Antarctic Circle, Tropic of Cancer, Arctic Circle, Tropic of Capricorn. Shade lightly two desert areas crossed by the Tropic of Capricorn and two desert areas crossed by the Tropic of Cancer, and print the name of each desert over the shaded portion. Trace also the course of the main stream of either the Amazon or the Congo. (b) Mark and name the town of New York and a town of similar latitude in Europe; mark and name the town of Glasgow and a town of similar latitude in Continental Europe; mark and name also the towns of Archangel and Brisbane. (c) Print in their proper places the following names: Eastern Ghats, British Columbia, Uganda, Straits Settlements. Print also the words “rubber,” “coffee,” “cocoa,” “jute” over districts where these are largely produced, one area for each commodity.
2. On the accompanying map of the British Isles: (a) Print in their proper places the following names: Channel Islands, Mull, Lough Foyle, Cairngorm Mountains, Cleveland. Mark and name the towns of Grimsby, Londonderry, Birmingham, Wick and Hawick. (b) Draw a straight line from the head of the Humber Estuary to that of the Bristol Channel, and another from the head of the Mersey Estuary to that of the Thames Estuary. Mark the point of intersection of the two lines with the letter A, and measure the distance of A from the four estuaries, writing the results (in miles) along the four lines. (c) Shade one area in Scotland noted for wheat-production, one noted for potato-growing, and one noted for dairy produce. Print the words “wheat,” “potatoes,” “dairy produce” over the shaded areas. Show by a dotted line the position of the water-parting in the N.W. Highlands of Scotland (i.e., in the part of the Highlands north of the Caledonian Canal), and print the word “steep” on the side of the dotted line where the ground seems to you to have the steeper slope.
3. Choose any two of the following important ports: Belfast, Dundee, Glasgow, Liverpool, Hull. State the parts of the world with which each of the two ports selected chiefly trades, and mention some of the articles which it exports and imports. Show how the situation in each case influences the nature of the trade carried on.
4. Ireland is larger than Scotland, but it has a smaller population, and this although much of Scotland is very scantily peopled. (a) What do you know of the distribution of the population in each country? (b) What geographical reasons can you give for the differences in the number and distribution of the inhabitants in the two countries?
5. With the help of the map used in Section B draw either (a) an enlarged sketch-map of the Fife peninsula and the Firths of Forth and Tay. Mark and name the towns of Edinburgh, Dundee, and Perth, and two other towns on the coast; the Forth and Tay Bridges; the Ochil Hills. Show the main line from Edinburgh to Dundee via the Forth and Tay Bridges. Or (b) an enlarged sketch-map of the Firth of Clyde, and of the estuary as far up as Glasgow. Show Arran, Bute, Loch Long, Loch Fyne, and Goat Fell; mark and name the towns of Glasgow, Greenock, and Dunoon. Show also the railway line from Glasgow to Ardrossan (via Paisley).
6. In a place in the Ganges valley the mean monthly temperature of May, the hottest month, is over 90° F.; of January, the coldest month, 60° F. The average rainfall in July, the rainiest month, is 12", while very little rain falls from November to May. Use these figures to compare the climate of Scotland as a whole, or of your own part of Scotland, with that of the Ganges valley.
7. Name one country in Continental Europe which, before the war, exported large amounts of food, and one which exported large amounts of manufactured goods, and point out some of the geographical differences between the two countries.
8. Give some account of the life of the inhabitants of one of the following areas, considered in relation to the geographical conditions: The Nile valley; or a tea-producing region in Ceylon; or a Saharan oasis; or the sheep-rearing belt in Australia.
9. Outline very briefly the main physical features of the United States of America, and name in order from north to south the chief cultivated plants grown along the line of the Mississippi. Suggest shortly reasons for the predominance of the plants you name in the successive agricultural belts.
10. Draw a sketch-map of a small island which is hilly to the centre and west, but comparatively flat in the east. Nearly half-way up the east coast there is a small bay, into which a stream flows, the bay being protected from the north wind by a well marked headland. On the shores of the bay is a village, from which a road leads round the south side of the island to a lighthouse at the south-western end. Your sketch-map, which should fill about half a page, should show all the features described above; the hills may be indicated either by contour lines or by shading.
11. Describe the difficulties which an explorer would experience either in the Polar regions or in an area of dense tropical forest. Explain generally the kind of equipment he would require for the region which you select.

HIGHER GRADE
(1920)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following themes: (a) A defence (such as might be read in a school debating society) of Queen Elizabeth for the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots; or of the English Parliament for the execution of Charles I.; or of Shylock for his attempted revenge; or of Becky Sharp for her life and conduct. (b) Describe the part played by the Mercantile Marine in the late War. (c) Compare the state of Britain in 1820 and in 1920. Have all the changes been for the better?
2. Read the following passage carefully, and then answer the questions which follow it: (a) What is the “deception” or “illusion” which Macaulay is here describing? (b) State in your own words the cause to which he ascribes it. (c) By what comparison does he illustrate it? (d) Does the comparison at all points fit the thing to be illustrated? If not, where do you think it fails? (e) What exactly does Macaulay mean by the last sentence, “But if we...antiquity”? (f) Do you gather anything from the passage as to Macaulay’s own conception of progress?
3. (a) Distinguish the following pairs of words: accidental, incidental; dependant, dependent; deprecate, depreciate; ingenious, ingenuous; venal, venial. (b) Write down two words now in common use which were added to the English vocabulary by each of the following: the mission of St. Augustine; the establishment of the Feudal System; the discovery of America; intercourse with Italy; recent scientific inventions. (c) Distinguish “epic poems” and “pastoral poems,” and name one example of each, with author. Define “irony,” “a refrain,” “rhetorical question,” and quote or invent one example of each.
4. When the pilgrims described in Chaucer’s Prologue were riding to Canterbury, into what groups would they naturally fall—i.e., who do you think would ride with whom, having regard to rank and character? Who does Chaucer say rode first, and who last?
5. Describe any two of Shakespeare’s heroines, so as to bring out the part they take in the action of the play, and the qualities which Shakespeare seems to admire in women.
6. Illustrate Burns’s sympathy with the working people in their labours, their troubles and their joys, quoting or referring to particular poems. What traces of similar sympathy with the working people have you noticed in Gray and Goldsmith?
7. Illustrate Wordsworth’s fondness for simple subjects, simple language and simple metres; and compare him in these respects with Keats.
8. Many Victorian poems take the form of “Dramatic Lyrics,” or “Dramatic Monologues,” in which the poet speaks not in his own person but through an assumed character. Mention five poems of this type by Browning, Tennyson or any other Victorian poet; tell the subject of each, and summarise one of them at some length.
9. The English Essay has taken various forms. We have reflective or philosophical essays, descriptive essays, historical essays, character sketches, and satirical or humorous essays on manners. Name one example of each of these five kinds, with the author’s name. Describe any one kind more fully, giving several examples of it. Under which head, if any, would you place Lamb’s Dissertation upon Roast Pig?
10. The events of a novel may be narrated in the first person. Name five examples of this kind of novel by well-known authors, including at least one by Dickens and one by Thackeray. Indicate some of the advantages and disadvantages of the method. Must the narrator always be the hero of the story?

HIGHER GRADE
(1920)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Choose any two of the following subjects and write a brief note about each of the two: (a) The Friars. (b) The Pilgrim Fathers. (c) The Methodist Revival in the 18th century. (d) The relation of Colonies to the Mother Country in the 18th century. (e) The use and partial disuse of canals in Great Britain. Explain, with illustrations, what is meant by any one of the following: (a) The Civil Service. (b) Plebiscite. (c) Indirect Taxation. (d) Crown Colonies.
2. Compare the services of St. Columba to Scotland with the services of St. Augustine to England.
3. “The character of the monarch determined the character of the reign.” Discuss this statement with reference to any three of the following: William the Conqueror; John; Edward II.; Mary, Queen of Scots; George IV.
4. Compare the sources of English wealth in the Middle Ages and in the 19th century.
5. The following battles are commonly described as “decisive.” What issue did each of them decide? Bannockburn, Bosworth, Naseby, Plassey, Trafalgar, Leipzig.
6. “If that you will France win, Then with Scotland first begin.” How far does this adage actually represent English policy between 1414 and 1560?
7. The reign of Elizabeth is often described as the most adventurous period of English history. Illustrate this from the careers of any two famous soldiers or sailors of the reign of Elizabeth.
8. What objects did Charles II. keep before him in (a) his foreign and (b) his domestic policy, and how far did he succeed in attaining these objects?
9. What reasons entitle any three of the following to be described as Empire-builders: Cromwell, Chatham, Warren Hastings, Captain Cook, James Watt, Lord Dalhousie, Cecil Rhodes?
10. Discuss one of the following topics: (a) The growth of religious toleration since 1689. (b) 19th century factory legislation. (c) The relations of the United Kingdom with France and with Germany in the reigns of Queen Victoria and Edward VII.

HIGHER GRADE
(1920)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. The accompanying map shows parts of Loch Awe and Loch Etive, with a section of the Callander and Oban railway, and the mountain mass of Ben Cruachan: (a) Point out the peculiar features of the Pass of Brander, and suggest an explanation of its peculiarities. (b) Describe a walk from Taynuilt railway station by the shore of Loch Etive, Glen Noe and Allt Mhoille to Loch Awe station, pointing out the chief observations of geographical interest which could be made during the walk. (c) Insert on the map a dotted line showing one feasible route from Loch Awe station up the eastern peak of Ben Cruachan, marked X on the map. Write a short description of the climb. (d) State the precise situation of the village of Taynuilt, and point out any advantages which this site offers, as compared, for example, with the mouth of Glen Noe. (e) At the head of Loch Awe the main road takes a wide bend to the north, and two small streams here are represented by perfectly straight lines. What conclusions as to the nature of the ground here can you draw from these facts? Why does not the railway follow the road?
2. What are the chief causes which determine the climate of a small area? A region in about lat. 35° N., situated on the west side of a large continent, is traversed by a lofty mountain range trending from S.W. to N.E. What climatic conditions would you expect to find in the coastal and transmontane belts? Give reasons.
3. The Highlands of Scotland are defined by geologists as the area cut off by the Highland Boundary Fault. Give some account of this tract of country, discussing the question whether or not it is geographically uniform.
4. Name and describe two types of forest, stating where you would expect to find each type, and the chief products of commercial value obtained from it. Add a note on the peoples of the forested areas named and their occupations.
5. What are the chief factors which make it possible for a country to export large amounts of wheat? Illustrate by an account of two wheat-exporting areas.
6. Write a short account either of a region now undergoing glaciation or of one containing active volcanoes, showing how the phenomena described influence the life of man.
7. State the precise situation of four of the following towns, and point out the advantages of position which each possesses: Singapore, Montreal, Chicago, Colombo, Cairo, Buenos Ayres.
8. Comment on the following statements, explaining why the great geographical discoveries were so important to Britain: “Before the great geographical discoveries of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Britain was at the end of the world.” “For the generations that followed Columbus, Britain gradually became the central, rather than the terminal, land of the world.”
9. Draw a sketch-map of France. Mark the chief mountain ranges and uplands, the larger rivers, four ports and four inland towns. Show, with careful reference to the relief, the course of one important international railway route.
10. A teacher of Geography in a foreign school proposes to take his class for a fortnight’s tour in Scotland, landing at Leith. Draw up a scheme to show how the time might be most profitably spent, about equal attention being given to economic, historical, and physical Geography.
11. Describe the physical features of South Africa, or of India south of the Ganges Valley, or of Australia, with special reference to the effects of the relief on the climate and the distribution of the population.