HIGHER GRADE
(1921)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition, of about two pages, on any one of the following subjects: (a) Robert the Bruce; John Knox; Robert Burns. Describe the character of any one of these great men, showing what he did for Scotland and why his memory is cherished by Scotsmen. (b) Discuss the reasons for learning any one of these languages: Latin, Greek, French, German, Spanish. Consider the linguistic training it affords, the literature it opens up, its practical value for life, etc. (c) From your own observation, or from what you have read, describe any one of the following: an auction; a boat-race; a military funeral; a hunt; private theatricals; a trial by jury; a tournament.
2. The following passage describes how the Roman Emperor Julian transported his fleet from the Euphrates to the Tigris. (a) Make a sketch-map showing the Euphrates, Tigris, Ctesiphon, Coche, Julian’s camp, the old line of the canal (Nahar-Malcha), and the new canal dug by Julian. (b) Explain briefly the two dangers Julian foresaw if his fleet should follow the old canal. (c) Give the precise meaning of the sentence printed in italics.
3. (a) Give the precise meaning of the following words as used by Gibbon: adjacent, impracticable, sallies, derivation, copious, intermediate, vestiges, obliterated, indefatigable, derided. (b) Make sentences using: allusion/illusion; casual/causal; eminent/imminent; notable/notorious; precedent/president. (c) Rewrite the following sentences in correct English: Peggy would have liked to have worn her turban. We must reconcile what we would like to do with what we can do. You may rely upon me doing all in my power. How contemptible is the contempt of menials for those whom they imagine are poor! He prefers to write at excessive length than to leave his meaning obscure.
4. From what works of history or fiction have you obtained the best picture of the Middle Ages? Discuss the knightly character as presented in these works.
5. The Merchant of Venice; King Henry IV., Part I.; Twelfth Night; Macbeth. Choose any one: point out scenes where Shakespeare employs prose and explain why he does so.
6. To what species of poetry do these belong: Lycidas, The Rape of the Lock, The Bard, The Deserted Village, Tam o’ Shanter? Select one and give an account of its substance and form.
7. What forms of English prose were brought to a high level in the 18th century? Name and describe one or two eminent examples.
8. Contrast Wordsworth and Coleridge; Byron and Shelley; Tennyson and Browning as men and poets.
9. Compare two of these fictional heroes: Frank Osbaldistone, Nicholas Nickleby, Clive Newcome, Evan Harrington, David Balfour.
10. What living English or Scottish writer is most likely to be famous in a hundred years? Give reasons.

LOWER GRADE
(1921)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Place these events in the appropriate century: guardianship of Wallace; death of Charlemagne; battle of Inkerman; reign of Henry V of England; execution of Charles I; capture of William the Lion; death of Napoleon I; murder of Darnley; reign of Harold of England; battle of Plassey; reign of Canute; career of the Black Prince; massacre of St. Bartholomew; union of the Piets and Scots; battle of Culloden; Franco-Prussian War.
2. (a) Who was King of Scots at the Norman Conquest? (b) Which English king held David II of Scotland prisoner? (c) What marriage is called the "Union of the Thistle and the Rose"? (d) Which English king received Bombay as his wife’s dowry? (e) Which French king aided American colonists against Britain? (f) Who was U.S. President during the Civil War?
3. Describe the role in Scottish history of three: Queen Margaret (wife of Malcolm Canmore); Alexander III; first Regent Albany; James IV; Marquis of Montrose.
4. Give an account of three sieges of Edinburgh Castle.
5. Explain events leading to (a) Robert Bruce’s coronation, (b) battle of Sauchieburn, (c) battle of Langside.
6. Describe two: career of John Knox; administration of Lauderdale; Darien Scheme; Jacobite Rebellion of 1715.
7. What historical events/figures are depicted by Scott in The Lord of the Isles, The Abbot, Old Mortality, or Waverley? Summarize one.
8. What role did these Scots play under George III: Lord Bute; Admiral Duncan; Sir John Moore; Henry Dundas?
9. Describe two: King David; Themistocles; Agricola; Saladin; Emperor Charles V; Cardinal Richelieu; Lord Clarendon; Empress Maria Theresa; Louis Philippe; Garibaldi.
10. What caused (a) Edward III’s invasion of France and (b) England’s expulsion from France under Henry VI?
11. What events connect to these places: Nectansmere, Carham, Sluys, Cadiz, New Plymouth, Tangier?
12. How does Bosworth Field mark the end of English baronial power? Support with Henry VII and VIII’s reigns.
13. What misdeeds/mistakes of James II caused the 1688-89 Revolution?
14. Write notes on three: Gunpowder Plot; Duke of Buckingham; New Model Army; battle of Blenheim; South Sea Bubble; capture of Quebec.
15. Trace Australasian Colonies’ growth.
16. What alliances did Britain make with Russia and Austria during the French Wars (1793-1815)? Which was more faithful?
17. Who was the greatest figure in Queen Victoria’s reign? Justify.

HIGHER GRADE
(1921)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. (i) Write notes on two: archery in the Middle Ages; "divine right of kings"; freedom of the press; sea-power; written constitution. (ii) Define and illustrate one: budget; nationalisation; established church; arbitration treaties.
2. Compare political conditions in England and Scotland pre-Norman Conquest. What races inhabited each?
3. "A weak king was a greater misfortune than a bad king." Illustrate from English/Scottish history (1100-1485).
4. Compare causes/results of the Hundred Years’ War with 18th-century Anglo-French wars.
5. Describe foreign trade of England or Scotland pre-1603.
6. State causes/results of three: Peasants’ Revolt; Pilgrimage of Grace; Ket’s Rebellion; Babington Plot; Monmouth’s Rebellion.
7. Summarize achievements of Drake, Admiral Blake, Wolfe.
8. Assess one as a statesman: Henry VIII, Elizabeth, Cromwell, William III, Pitt the Younger.
9. Trace British dominion growth in India, Australia, or South Africa.
10. Discuss one: influence of political books/pamphlets (18th/19th century); 19th-century urban growth; British-Turkish relations (1815-1914); religious movements in 19th-century England/Scotland; 19th-century Scottish local government changes.
11. Describe two: social life under Lycurgus; "tyranny" in Ancient Greece; Xerxes’ invasion; Athenian Empire growth; Pericles’ career; Spartan hegemony; Demosthenes’ political aims.
12. Explain political problems of the city-state or Greek colonies’ relations with mother-cities.
13. Discuss one: Livy’s historical value; spread of Christianity pre-Constantine; Roman populace’s role in Roman history.
14. Describe two: Gauls’ invasion; First Punic War; Carthage’s end; provincial administration under the Republic; Marius’ career; Pompey’s conquests; Second Civil War; Tiberius’ character; Trajan’s conquests.
15. Assess two: Otto the Great; Pope Innocent III; Rienzi; Calvin; Richelieu; Mirabeau; Cavour.
16. What was the Holy Roman Empire? How did it end? What succeeded it among German-speaking peoples?
17. When did Holland or Sweden play major roles in European politics?
18. Write notes on two: Viking invasions; Latin Empire of the East; Ottoman rise; discovery of America; German Peasants’ War; French settlements in India; Voltaire’s influence; Greek War of Independence; Austro-Prussian War (1866); Japan’s rise.
19. Trace French government changes (1789-1871), explaining each circumstance.
20. Map the Thirteen Colonies at U.S. independence recognition. Explain U.S. expansion causes.

LOWER GRADE
(1921)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. (a) Name three islands/island groups crossed by 50°, 23½°, and 0° parallels. (b) Mark Fiume, Batum, Montreal on the map. Determine latitude/longitude of Galveston, Rangoon, Montevideo. (c) Label areas inhabited by Dyaks, Lapps, Eskimo. Shade sponge-fishing, rice-growing, oil-producing areas.
2. (a) Mark Ben Nevis, Scafell, Snowdon, Macgillicuddy’s Reeks, Loch Awe, R. Findhorn, Bantry Bay on the map. (b) Insert Edinburgh-Inverness or London-Holyhead railway line with two stations. (c) Shade crofting, large farming, coal-mining areas. Mark towns and counties.
3. Name three Irish industries, their locations, advantages, and associated towns.
4. Draw a sketch-map of Yorkshire. Mark York, Hull, Leeds, Scarborough, rivers, Moors, Wolds. Shade iron-smelting and steel goods areas with towns.
5. Explain suitability of Devonshire cider, Kent hops, Harris tweed, Cheviot sheep.
6. Compare climates of Glasgow, Moscow, and Naples in temperature, rainfall, and reasons for differences.
7. Contrast Norway and Sweden in surface, climate, products. Name two Norwegian towns and one Swedish, with notes.
8. Describe New Zealand or Argentina: physical features, products, occupations.
9. Explain San Francisco, Singapore, Constantinople, Chicago, Port Said’s trade routes and traffic.
10. Why was much of Africa unexplored until the 19th century? Name two explorers and their contributions.
11. Why is India more populous than Australia? Compare geographical features and densely peopled areas.

HIGHER GRADE
(1921)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. (a) Describe glaciation features in the Lochnagar map. (b) Plan a walk from Lochcallater Lodge over Lochnagar, estimating time. (c) Does Loch Muick’s appearance support lakes’ short-lived nature? Explain. (d) Assess Lochnagar’s population density from the map.
2. Compare maritime, continental, and Mediterranean climates. Where are they found? Name characteristic crops.
3. Define Scottish coalfield limits. Name four fields and their coal uses.
4. How do sailors find latitude/longitude? Calculate ship position if sun’s altitude is 16.5° at 2 p.m. GMT on Dec. 21.
5. List major raw cotton areas. Explain production advantages under climate/soil, labor, market access.
6. Describe limestone area scenery and human impact (e.g., Pennines, North/South Downs, Karst).
7. Describe two: Borneo, South Island (NZ), Cuba, Madagascar (people, products).
8. Explain Yokohama, Shanghai, Baku, Trebizond, Basra, Smyrna’s importance and positions.
9. Sketch Red Sea, Sinai, Gulf of Aden. Mark Port Said, Suakin, Mecca, Aden. Label Hedjaz, Yemen, British Somaliland, Perim. Draw Tropic of Cancer.
10. Why is Asia’s population density lower than Europe’s despite larger numbers? Compare dense/sparse Asian regions.
11. Trace Canada/Australia’s exploration/settlement. Explain export changes.