LOWER GRADE
(1923)
ENGLISH
PAPER 1
1. Write a Composition of about two pages on any one of the following subjects: Amateur photography. Mr. Pickwick learns to ride a bicycle. Lost on the hills. The story of Joan of Arc, or of Flora Macdonald, or of Florence Nightingale.
2. Read the following passage carefully, and then answer the questions that follow it: Make a plan of the ground described in this passage, using about half a page of your book for this purpose, and mark on it the palisade round the lists; the two entrances; the “platform” for the knights challengers and the passage leading to it; the “enclosed space” for the knights who meant to fight the challengers and the passage leading to it; the galleries; the space reserved for yeomanry; and the banks of turf for the “promiscuous multitude.”
3. Give the exact meaning of these words as used in the above passage: gradually, palisades, accessible, platform, pavilions, challengers, temporary, yeomanry, degree, vulgar, promiscuous, multitude.
4. Give the meaning of the following expressions: to make bricks without straw; the last straw; to clutch at a straw; to build on the sand; to plough the sands; the sands of time. From what story or proverb did any three of these expressions arise?
5. The mother of one of your friends has invited you to a party. Write a polite note, declining the invitation, and giving a reasonable excuse.
6. Enumerate as many of Shakespeare’s English historical plays as you can, and describe the part played by the King of England in any one of them.
7. Name four Scottish, English or British sovereigns that appear in any of Scott’s novels or poems, and describe the part played by any one of them.
8. Name four English or Scottish poets who have written poems about beasts or birds. Name one such poem by each author, and give a fuller account of any one of the poems named.
9. Take any fairy-tale that you know, and show how you would set about making a school play out of it, explaining into what scenes you would divide it.
10. In what plays or stories do the following characters appear? Name the author of the play or story in each case, and give a fuller account of one of the characters: Hopeful, Bob Acres, Jeanie Deans, Steerforth, Mowgli.

LOWER GRADE
(1923)
HISTORY
PAPER 2
1. Place the following events in the century appropriate to each on the accompanying table: the battle of Neville’s Cross; the impeachment of Warren Hastings; the reign of Macbeth; the capture of Constantinople by the Turks; the death of the Maid of Norway; the execution of Lady Jane Grey; the charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava; the accession of Alfred the Great; the birth of Robert Burns; the wreck of the White Ship; the death of Martin Luther; the battle of Omdurman; the Solemn League and Covenant; the murder of Becket; the Toleration Act; the career of Dunstan.
2. Distinguish between: Queen Mary Tudor and Queen Mary of Orange; William Rufus and William the Lion; Thomas Cromwell (Earl of Essex) and Oliver Cromwell.
3. What part was played in Scottish History by any two of the following: Edward Balliol; the first Regent Albany; Bishop Kennedy; the Regent Morton; Alexander Leslie, Earl of Leven; Viscount Dundee; James Watt?
4. For what reasons did James II. suppress the Black Douglases, and why may their fall be regarded as a turning point in the history of the Scottish monarchy?
5. Tell briefly the story of the Scottish Reformation during the reign of Mary, Queen of Scots.
6. Give a short account of any two of the following: the Scottish conquest of the Lothians; Scandinavian settlements in Scotland; the battle of Stirling Bridge; the Scottish Navy under James IV.; the Bishops’ Wars; the battle of Worcester; the Convention of 1689; the escape of Prince Charles Edward.
7. In what novels or poems does Sir Walter Scott describe: the condition of Scotland under Robert III.; the court of James IV.; the Civil War in Scotland in Charles I’s reign; the Covenanters in the time of Charles II.? Write a short note upon any one of these topics, as treated by Scott.
8. Tell what you know of the history of any Scottish Burgh or Cathedral or Abbey.
9. Give some account of any two of the following: Ezra; Demosthenes; Mark Antony; St. Augustine of Canterbury; Pope Innocent III.; John Calvin; Henry IV. of France; Charles XII. of Sweden; the Empress Maria Theresa; Metternich; Marshal Foch.
10. Choose any King of England between 1016 and 1307, and tell briefly what was good and what was bad in his policy and in its results.
11. Give a brief account of the circumstances in which any two of the following battles were fought, and say why they were important: Bannockburn, Agincourt, Towton, Naseby; Sedgemoor, Plassey, Trafalgar, Corunna, the Marne (1914).
12. Tell briefly the story of Warwick the King Maker and Archbishop Cranmer.
13. Write notes on any two of the following: the accession of the House of Tudor; the foreign policy of Henry VIII.; the Petition of Right; the flight of James II. and VII.; the Seven Years’ War; the passing of the Reform Act of 1832.
14. How did Canada and the Punjab come to belong to the British Empire?
15. What causes have led to the growth of large towns in the last century and a half?
16. Sketch the career of either the Duke of Wellington or Lord Roberts.
17. What were the causes of quarrel between England and France in the reign of Edward III. and between Great Britain and France in the reign of Queen Anne? At what period in the nineteenth century did Britain and France form a military alliance?
18. Explain three of the following terms: the Provisions of Oxford; the Elizabethan Church Settlement; the Commonwealth; the Protectorate; the Act of Settlement; Catholic Emancipation; the British North America Act; the Union of South Africa.

LOWER GRADE
(1923)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER 3
1. On the accompanying map of part of the British Isles: Print the following names in their proper places: Sidlaws, Snowdon, Londonderry, Kirkwall, Montrose, Dunfermline, R. Tyne, R. Garry, R. Spey, R. Liffey, R. Dee (Cheshire), Strathmore. Draw lines to show the position of the southern boundary of the Highlands, the Forth and Clyde Canal, the Caledonian Canal, and print each name along the appropriate line. Draw, very carefully, either the railway line from Edinburgh to Aberdeen by the coastal route; or the railway line from Perth to Inverness by the direct route. Mark the two towns named in either case. Outline in firm dotted lines the basins of the Tay and the Yorkshire Ouse (excluding the Trent).
2. On the accompanying map of the world: Print the following names in their proper places: California, Florida, Borneo, Haiti, Gold Coast. Shade small areas producing large quantities of each of the following for export (one area for each product), and print the name of the crop beside the shaded area: rice, oranges, coffee. The latitudes and longitudes of four important towns are as follows: (1) 23° S., 43° W.; (2) 37½° S., 145° E.; (3) 37½° N., 6° W.; (4) 6½° N., 79½° E. Mark the position of each town with a cross, and print the name close to the cross.
3. Select one of the following counties: Devonshire, or Argyll, or Kerry. Describe the physical features of the county selected, and write notes on the climate and the occupations of the people, naming two towns.
4. Name one area in Scotland, one in England and one in Ireland where shipbuilding is carried on extensively, and explain as fully as you can the advantages which each area named possesses for the industry.
5. Select any three of the following, state the position of each of the three as precisely as you can, and explain in what way they are interesting: Staffa, Giant’s Causeway, The Peak of Derbyshire, Ben Nevis, The Weald of Kent, The Falls of Foyers.
6. Name areas in Scotland (one area for each product) where each of the following is produced on a large scale: potatoes, small fruits, dried fish. Explain why the places you mention are suitable for the production of these articles.
7. Draw, with the help of the map used in Section B, a map of Africa north of the Equator, to fill about half a page in your book. Show the Suez Canal, Lake Chad, the courses of the Nile and the Niger; and mark and name the towns of Port Said, Timbuktu and Tangier. Name also Morocco and Abyssinia.
8. Labrador and the British Isles lie in approximately the same latitude, but their climates differ greatly. Point out the main differences of climate and explain the causes of these differences.
9. Compare and contrast Canada and Australia briefly in respect of natural resources, occupations of the people, and export trade.
10. Till the end of the fifteenth century Venice supplied Europe with pepper; by the early part of the sixteenth century the pepper trade had shifted to Lisbon, and the price had dropped to one-half. How can you explain these facts?

HIGHER GRADE
(1923)
ENGLISH
PAPER 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following subjects: The ascent of Mount Everest. Some recent advances in Science. The career and character either of Oliver Cromwell or of Queen Victoria. Naval Warfare—past and present. If you could have lived at any other period than the present, what period would you choose, and why?
2. Read the following passage carefully, and then answer the questions that follow it: Describe this island under the heads of: Its situation on the globe; Its coast-line; Its surface features (heights, streams, etc.); Its climate; Its vegetable life (trees and other plants); Its animal life. Explain the expressions “drooping crown of plumes,” “the broad belt of the world,” “hollower-bellowing ocean.” Explain the words “myriad” and “zenith” as here used. From what language does each of these words come? Point out three verses in which the sound is made an echo to the sense.
3. Distinguish the following pairs of words carefully: contrary and contradictory; important and importunate; ostentatious and ostensible; reverend and reverent; luxurious and luxuriant. What is Scots? Why is it wrong to regard Scots as a corruption of Standard English? Parse the words italicised in the following: “We heard a lark singing.” “A little singing bird.” “At the sorrow of my sweet singing.” “I’ll buy me a walking cane.” “You can’t make omelettes without breaking eggs.” Define and illustrate the following terms: alliteration, blank verse, burlesque, heroic couplet, onomatopoetic words.
4. Describe Chaucer’s humour, and illustrate it from the Prologue or from any of the Canterbury Tales that you have read.
5. Name six famous stories in verse, and give an account of one of them.
6. What do you know of the Scottish Chaucerians?
7. Describe the part played by the villain in any play of Shakespeare’s.
8. Dr. Johnson says that the sonnet is not a success in English. Discuss this dictum. Would Johnson be of the same opinion to-day?
9. Discuss either Defoe or Swift as a story-teller.
10. “Scott has drawn characters from all ranks of life from the monarch to the slave.” Discuss this, and illustrate it from your own reading.
11. Byron—George Eliot—Mark Twain—Mr. Thomas Hardy—Sir James Barrie—Mr. Rudyard Kipling. With what part of the world would you say that each of these writers was most familiar? Support your opinion by references.
12. What are the qualities that make a good prose style? Is the same style good for all subjects?

HIGHER GRADE
(1923)
HISTORY
PAPER 1
1. Choose any two of the following topics and write a brief note about each of them: Roman roads in Britain. The political consequences of the invention of gunpowder. The change in international relationships brought about by the Reformation. The Liberty of the Subject. A contrast between the reasons for emigration to the colonies three hundred years ago and at the present time. Explain any one of the following terms: The Cabinet. An Insurance Company. Indirect Taxation. Education Authority.
2. For what reasons may the history of Scotland be said to contain more romantic interest than the history of England?
3. Why was Winchester at one period the capital of England, and when and why did London come to supersede it?
4. “Success is often denied to the greatest national heroes.” Criticise this statement with reference to the career of either Simon de Montfort or Sir William Wallace.
5. The English Reformation has been described as beginning about 1533, in 1547, and in 1558-59. Give reasons in support of each of these dates.
6. How is the reign of Queen Elizabeth connected with events and adventures on the seas?
7. Write such an account of the character and policy of James VI. and I. as a Scottish Presbyterian might have given to an English Puritan in 1603.
8. “He was greater as a soldier than as a statesman.” How far is this true of Cromwell, and of the Duke of Wellington?
9. Explain the importance in English history of any three of the following: the Black Prince, Warwick the King Maker, the Earl of Clarendon, Lord Bolingbroke, the Duke of Cumberland, John Wilkes.
10. Discuss one of the following topics: the part played by the Church of England and the Tory party in the Revolution of 1688-9; the causes of the American War of Independence; the causes of the outbreak of war with France in 1793; industrial and social discontent after Waterloo.
11. In what respects may the reign of Queen Victoria be described as the greatest in our history?
12. Give a brief account of any two of the following: the legislation of Lycurgus; ostracism; the story of Thermopylae; the rise of Athens to greatness; the Retreat of the Ten Thousand; Epaminondas.
13. Why is the history of so small and so divided a country as Greece of such interest and importance after the lapse of more than two thousand years?
14. Give a brief account of any two of the following: the legends of the founding of Rome; the Twelve Tables; the conquest of the Italian peninsula; the first Punic War; the merits and defects of pro-consular government; the achievements of the Gracchi; the career of Mark Antony.
15. Either give some account of the political aims and opinions of Cicero; or account for the impression left upon subsequent generations by the personality of the Emperor Augustus.
16. Estimate the importance of any two of the following in the history of their times: Julian the Apostate; Theodoric the Goth; Mohammed; the Emperor Henry IV.; Pope Innocent III.; Savonarola; Francis I. of France; John Calvin; the Great Elector; Charles XII. of Sweden; Maria Theresa; Mirabeau; Bismarck; Mazzini.
17. Either describe the circumstances which led to the fall of the Eastern Empire in 1453; or trace the series of conflicts between France and the German States from 1756 to 1871.
18. Explain and illustrate the growth and the decline of the power of Spain.
19. Write a note on any two of the following: the baptism of Clovis; the Normans in France; the revival of the Empire by Otto I.; the career of Henry the Lion; French monarchy under Philip Augustus; the Council of Constance; the Diet of Worms; the siege of Vienna in 1683; the career of Montcalm; the battle of Austerlitz; the capture of Rome in 1870; the rise of Japan.
20. Discuss one of the following topics: the relations between Great Britain and the United States of America in 1810-1814 and in 1861-1865; the growth of British dominion in South Africa; the German Empire, 1871-1914.

HIGHER GRADE
(1923)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER 1
1. The accompanying map shows parts of Lochs Long and Lomond and the northern extremity of the Gare Loch: Name one example of each of the following: a through valley, a rocky peak, a hanging valley. State clearly how you recognise each of these land forms on the map, and write notes on the probable mode of origin of through valleys. Describe the course of the railway from Garelochhead to the northern limit of the sheet, pointing out the chief advantages of the route selected. Suggest reasons for the fact that road and railway sometimes run side by side and sometimes diverge. Write a description of the Douglas Water, noting the position of the water-partings of the head-stream and the lateral tributaries. Show what conclusions as to the characters of the lateral valleys you can draw from the information given on the map. Write notes on the position of Arrochar and Garelochhead.
2. What is meant by the scale of a map? A certain sketch-map has no scale attached, but you know that a railway station shown is precisely 1,320 yards from a village, and the distance between the two on the map is 1 inch. What is the scale of the map? Would a map on a scale of 1/20,000 be on a larger or a smaller scale than this map? Give reasons.
3. Give a careful comparative account either of the Atlantic (Oceanic) and the Mediterranean types of climate as represented in Europe, or of the continental type as represented in Siberia and the monsoon type as represented in China. Show, in the case selected, the connection between the differences in climate and the differences in natural vegetation and cultivated crops.
4. Name three important British ports on the North Sea (excluding London) and three important Continental ports also on the North Sea. State precisely the position of one British and one Continental example, and give a reasoned account of the trade of each.
5. Discuss as fully as you can the causes which determine density of population in Scotland. Name some areas with a very sparse population and indicate reasons for this.
6. What is a fiord coast? Describe carefully one example of such a coast, indicating the favourable sites for villages or towns and discussing the occupations of the inhabitants. Illustrate by a sketch-map.
7. Draw a sketch-map of the Nile or of the Mississippi or Ganges. Show the chief tributaries and three important towns; and indicate by suitable symbols the chief products in the various parts of the river’s course. Add a note explaining the symbols you use.
8. Give a careful account of one transcontinental railway, explaining clearly its value to the country—or countries—through which it runs.
9. Select one of the following: Czecho-Slovakia, Yugoslavia, New Poland, Greater Rumania. In the case selected state generally the territories included, indicate the racial composition of the population, and describe briefly the natural resources. Name the capital.
10. Give an account, illustrated by a sketch-map, either of the island of Ceylon or of Tasmania. Refer especially to the physical features, the climate and the products.
11. Write a short historical essay on the character and routes of the trade between Europe and the Far East, arranging your material under three heads: the period down to the end of the fifteenth century, till the opening of the Suez Canal, to the present day.