Higher Grade
1925
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about two pages on any one of the following: "What I want," said Mr. Gradgrind, "is Facts. Teach these boys and girls nothing but Facts. Facts alone are wanted in life." Discuss Mr. Gradgrind’s theory of Education. "Self-government is more important than good government." "The world grows smaller every day." A Polar night. A character sketch of Charles II., or of William III., or of George III., or of Queen Victoria.
2. Read the following passage carefully and then answer the questions that follow it: Look next on Greatness; say where Greatness lies? "Where, but among the Heroes and the Wise?" Heroes are much the same, the point’s agreed, From Macedonia’s madman to the Swede; The whole strange purpose of their lives to find, Or make, an enemy of all mankind! Not one looks backward, onward still he goes, Yet ne’er looks forward farther than his nose. No less alike the Politic and Wise; All sly, slow things, with circumspective eyes: Men in their loose unguarded hours they take, Not that themselves are wise, but others weak. But grant that those can conquer, these can cheat; ’Tis phrase absurd to call a Villain Great: Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave, Is but the more a fool, the more a knave. Who noble ends by noble means obtains, Or failing, smiles in exile or in chains, Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed Like Socrates, that Man is great indeed. What two classes of men are popularly entitled "great"? What does the poet here mean by "Heroes"? How does he characterise them? And how does he dispose of their claim to greatness? With what class does he identify the "Wise"? How does he characterise them? And how dispose of their claim to greatness? To what class of men does he finally ascribe true greatness, and why? Who were "Macedonia’s madman," "good Aurelius," "Socrates"? Of what class does the poet give no examples? Supply two examples of this class yourself. Who do you think wrote these verses? What evidence of their authorship do you find in the verses themselves?
3. "No person has a better right than Lord Brougham to speak contemptuously of Cæsar. Cæsar was the purest and most Attic writer of his country; and there is no trace of intemperance, in thought or in expression, throughout the whole series of his hostilities. He was the most generous friend, he was the most placable enemy; he rose with moderation, and he fell with dignity. Can we wonder, then, at Lord Brougham’s unfeigned antipathy and assumed contempt? In the style of Cæsar there is calmness, there is precision, there is a perspicuity which shows objects in their proper size and position; there is strength without strain, and superiority without assertion." Give the meanings of the underlined words as used in this passage. Add the derivation where you can. Give the opposites of "calmness," "precision," "perspicuity," as applied to style. Distinguish between "strength" and "strain," and between "superiority" and "assertion."
4. Give a general analysis of the following stanza. Name the metre of the several lines, and point out the arrangement of the rhymes: "In autumn, on the skirts of Bagley Wood—Where most the gipsies by the turf-edged way Pitch their smoked tents, and every bush you see With scarlet patches tagg’d and shreds of grey, Above the forest-ground called Thessaly—The blackbird, picking food, Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all; So often has he known thee past him stray, Rapt, twirling in thy hand a wither’d spray, And waiting for the spark from heaven to fall."
5. What words or expressions, literal or metaphorical, does our English vocabulary owe to any four of the following: the Crusades; chivalry and the tournament; hunting and hawking; alchemy and astrology; the East India trade; intercourse with Holland; Italian music; applications of electricity; the cinematograph; aerial navigation; wireless telephony?

Higher Grade
1925
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. In our earlier History, invasions of this island were easy and frequent. Illustrate and account for this circumstance.
2. Compare political and social conditions in England in the reign of William I., and in the reign of Edward I. How far had Scotland attained national unity before the outbreak of the War of Independence?
3. Account for the temporary success and the ultimate failure of English policy either in Scotland or in France, in the Middle Ages.
4. What is meant by the Italian Renaissance? How and when did it influence (a) England, (b) Scotland?
5. How did events in France, Spain, and Scotland affect English foreign policy in the reign of Elizabeth?
6. Discuss the view that the Great Civil War was rendered inevitable by the character and ambitions of James VI. and I. and Charles I. Trace the steps by which James II. and VII. lost the throne.
7. What motives influenced the growth of colonisation (a) in the seventeenth and (b) in the eighteenth century? Illustrate your answer with a sketch map of the thirteen American colonies.
8. Select the five greatest names in British History from (1689) to (1832) and, in two instances, give your reasons for your choice.
9. Discuss one of the following topics: the failure of the Jacobite Risings; the influence of the French Revolution upon domestic affairs in Great Britain; the settlement of Europe after Waterloo.
10. Tell what you know of any one of the following: factory legislation; the Indian Mutiny, its causes and consequences; the Irish question in the nineteenth century; the rise and development of trade unions.
11. Give a very short account of the three wars in consequence of which the King of Prussia became German Emperor. What was the attitude of this country towards these wars?
12. What special interest attaches to the history of either Canada or Australia in the nineteenth century?

Lower Grade
1925
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of part of the British Isles: Show, by firm dotted lines, the main water-parting in (1) the Southern Uplands of Scotland and (2) the Pennine Region of Northern England. Mark the Arrochar-Tarbet Gap with the letter A, the Biggar (Tweed-Clyde) Gap with B, the Tyne Gap with C, the Aire Gap with D, and the Beattock and Shap (railway) Summits with E and F respectively. Shade and name the Fens, the Sidlaw Hills and the Ayrshire coalfield, and name the Rivers Boyne and Nith. Show by a dotted line the shortest steamship route between Scotland and Ireland, naming the terminal ports.
2. On the accompanying map of Africa: Name the Zambesi, Niger, Blue Nile and Orange Rivers, and mark and name the towns Cairo, Mombasa, Durban, Khartum and Port Sudan. Write the words palm-oil, cotton, gold, cacao, wool, respectively on one area producing each, and write the name of the area intended close to the product. Print the letters A, B, and C respectively—A on an area receiving practically no rain, B on one receiving most of its rain in its warmer season, C on one with most rain in its colder season, and write the name of one characteristic product beside each of the letters.
3. With the help of the map used in Question 1 describe the district embracing the counties of Fife and Kinross, with special reference to the distribution of population, the products, and the occupations of the people. Show how the area is suited for the occupations carried on.
4. Name one important fishing-port in Scotland and one in England, state as precisely as you can the position of each, and explain how it is that the ports named are able to carry on this industry on a large scale. Add a note on the chief fish caught at each of the ports selected.
5. Point out the main contrasts between Scotland north of a line between the Forth and the Clyde, and England south of one from the Thames to the Severn, as regards climate, products and occupations of the people. Offer explanations of the contrasts you mention.
6. State the exact position of Belfast, Cork, Dublin and Limerick, and show how the trade and trade-relations of each town are influenced by its position.

Higher Grade
1925
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. The accompanying map shows a part of the Spey valley, from below Kingussie to the vicinity of Aviemore, with the surrounding country: Write a careful, detailed, description of the part of the Spey valley shown. Note and explain the symbols used in the area upstream from Loch Insh, and point out the drainage peculiarities of Loch Alvie. Describe broadly, and so far as possible explain, the distribution of woodland in the area. Making use both of the symbols employed on the map, and of your previous knowledge of the Scottish Highlands, describe also the probable nature of the woodland. Discuss, giving reasons, the position of the lines of communication (railway, roads, paths), and add notes on the distribution of population.
2. State, in broadest outline, the main facts in regard to the geology of Scotland, and point out the chief ways in which the geological structure affects the life of man in the country, adding a short note on the rocks of England as compared with those of Scotland. State, giving a physical explanation, the chief causes to which rain is due, and illustrate by describing the distribution of precipitation over a mountain-range exposed to warm, moisture-laden winds.
3. In what chief parts of Continental Europe are the following crop-plants grown on a large scale—flax, maize, mulberry, vine? Give reasons and state what becomes of the product in each case.
4. Describe shortly the country traversed by the Rhine and estimate the importance of the river as a waterway.
5. Discuss the causes which have led to the rise of Glasgow as a great commercial city, comparing it in this respect with Dundee and Aberdeen.
6. Describe, with a sketch-map, the river systems of Yorkshire or of N.E. Ireland, pointing out the main peculiarities.