HIGHER GRADE
(1930)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a Composition, not exceeding three foolscap pages in length, on any one of the following subjects: Lessons by wireless in school; The importance of preserving the beauties of rural Scotland; Which has most benefited mankind—the great soldier, the great scientist, or the great poet? Mary Queen of Scots describes to a friend at the French Court her return to Scotland, and her impressions of that country, its people and its capital.
2. Read the following passage carefully and answer the questions: What is the main theme of this passage, and on what occasion was it suggested to the writer’s mind? Enumerate at least four points which he brings forward in support of the belief he mentions.
3. Explain the expressions printed in italics.
4. Give a general grammatical analysis of the second sentence in the passage.
5. Give the precise meaning of the following words, as used in this passage: stage, infinitely, annually, Parliament, legislators, remote, encamped, courser, salutation, uninhabited, misbecome, courtesy.
6. Choose any five of the words quoted and break them into their component parts, giving in each case the force of root and affix.
7. Write three short paragraphs comparing either Canada or Australia with India in point of (1) climate, (2) products, and (3) inhabitants.
8. Either How were our American colonies founded, and how were they lost? Give dates where you can. Or What is meant by the Industrial Revolution? What inventions brought it about? And what effect did it have on the occupations of the people and the distribution of the population in Great Britain?

HIGHER GRADE
(1930)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Read the following passage through and then answer the questions: What faults are here imputed to British commerce? What reasons are suggested for the existence of these faults? What means are suggested for removing them? And what benefits would flow from their removal?
2. Explain the metaphor in "handicapped," and point out where the same metaphor is repeated later in the passage.
3. Give the exact meaning of the following words and phrases as used in this passage, adding the derivation of the words printed in italics: commercial expansion, a telling indictment, lethargy, complacent assumption, taxed, adaptability, materially, alleviate.
4. Read the following lines carefully and then answer the questions: Give the substance of Sarpedon’s argument in your own words; explain the last two lines fully.
5. Comment on the use of—fearful, dare, fighting—in this passage. Give the exact meaning, and if you can the derivation, of—elude, lust, inexorable, doom, bestow.
6. Who do you think wrote these lines? On what grounds of style and metre is your conclusion based?
7. Rewrite the following passage from Ben Jonson in good modern English, eliminating all archaisms of vocabulary, accidence, syntax or order.
8. Quote, or invent, a sentence to illustrate each of the following: inversion, alliteration, apostrophe, irony.
9. From what source, and about what date, did English borrow each of these words: chivalry, algebra, sepoy, garage?

HIGHER GRADE
(1930)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 3
1. The two passages, A and B, printed below are both translations of the same extract from a Hebrew poem. Answer the following questions: Which of the two versions, A or B, do you consider superior as literature? Give reasons for your opinion, and support it by quotation from, or reference to, particular verses.
2. In verses 12-15 show how B, by making the meaning clearer, has improved on A.
3. Though the passages are written in prose, what do you notice about the second half of each verse (when compared with the first half) which distinguishes the writing from ordinary prose?
4. From Chaucer’s description of his Canterbury Pilgrims, what would you gather that he most admired, and most disliked, in human nature? Illustrate by quotation.
5. Illustrate from Shakespeare what you gain, and what you lose, by merely reading a play instead of seeing it acted.
6. Contrast the poetry of Pope with the poetry of Burns.
7. Illustrate from Milton or Tennyson or Gray the use which a poet can make of his Biblical, classical or historical learning.
8. Either Illustrate from the Essays of Elia Charles Lamb’s most striking qualities—his goodness of heart, his quaint humour, his love of old things, etc. Or Write a brief appreciation of Hazlitt, or of Stevenson as an essayist, or of any living essayist known to you.
9. Give a short account of one humorous person in one of the following novels, showing in what way the humour is characteristic of the author: The Antiquary, Pride and Prejudice, The Pickwick Papers, Adam Bede, Vanity Fair, Far from the Madding Crowd.
10. Show the importance in literary history of one of the following: Marlowe, Dryden, Dr. Johnson, Wordsworth.
11. What parts of Macaulay’s prose works have you read, and what do you think of his descriptions of historical incidents and characters?

HIGHER GRADE
(1930)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Show very briefly the historical significance of five of the following events: the death of Edward the Confessor; the murder of the Red Comyn; the marriage of Edward II; the battle of Bosworth; the death of Mary Tudor; the Solemn League and Covenant; the siege of Vienna (1683); the siege of Arcot; the fall of the Bastille; the surrender of Napoleon III; the Serajevo murders.
2. Give some account of British revolts against the Romans. What was the effect of the withdrawal of the Roman garrisons?
3. How did Canute come to be King of England and Macbeth come to be King of Scotland? Sum up the results of each reign.
4. How is the history of England connected with that of France in the reigns of John and Henry V?
5. Estimate the respective contributions of Wallace and Bruce to the vindication of Scottish independence.
6. Indicate the importance of any three of the following: the Peasants’ Revolt; the career of Joan of Arc; the fall of the House of Douglas; the English cloth industry in the Middle Ages; the invention of printing.
7. Either How did the discovery of the New World influence the history of Spain and England in the sixteenth century? Or Why has the reign of James IV been called a golden age in Scottish History?
8. How did England escape an internal religious war at the period of the Reformation and become involved in one in the following century?
9. Give a brief account of any two of the following: the Elizabethan Poor Law; the establishment of the East India Company; Gustavus Adolphus; John Hampden; General Monck; William Penn; Peter the Great; the foundation of the Bank of England; "enclosures" in the eighteenth century.
10. Trace briefly the causes of wars between Great Britain and France between 1689 and 1763 and account for the long interval of peace after 1713.
11. How are any two of the following writers connected with the history of their times: Sir Thomas More, Francis Bacon, Jonathan Swift, Lord Bolingbroke?
12. Either What influence, apart from foreign policy, did the French Revolution exercise upon Great Britain? Or Explain how Great Britain became rich enough to stand the strain of the long French War, 1793-1815.
13. Draw a map to illustrate one of the following, and explain the importance of the places you mark in connection with the events to which your map relates: the growth of British Dominion in India, 1763-1857; the Peninsular War; the development of Australia; the Union of Italy.
14. Trace the relations between Great Britain and the United States of America from 1783 to 1918.
15. What important political movements or arguments do you connect with any one of the following: Edmund Burke; Samuel Wilberforce; Sir Robert Peel; the Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury (Lord Ashley); Charles Stewart Parnell?
16. Give a brief outline either of the changes in the parliamentary franchise since 1832 or of the development of the means of transport and communication since the introduction of railways.

LOWER GRADE
(1930)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of Scotland: Name Arran, Mull, Islay and Bute. Mark and name the Forth and Clyde canal, the Crinan canal and the Caledonian canal.
2. Mark and name the towns of Grangemouth, Kirkcaldy, Inverness, Dumfries and Montrose; and name the rivers Tweed, Spey, Nith, Findhorn and Don, and Lochs Lomond, Long, Fyne, Ness and Rannoch.
3. Draw, with careful reference to relief, two railway routes from Glasgow to Carlisle. Mark and name the latter town and one intermediate station on each route shown.
4. Shade and name on the map one area producing large quantities of small fruits, one yielding granite, and one in which water has been or is being utilised to generate hydro-electric power. Print F on the first area, G on the second, and P on the third.
5. On the accompanying map of North and Central America: Name Long Island, Newfoundland, Cuba, Lake Winnipeg and Hudson Bay; and mark and name the towns of Toronto, St. Louis, Boston, Mexico City and Buffalo.
6. Shade one area producing large amounts of raw cotton, one producing tobacco, one producing maize and one producing timber. In each case print the name of the product and of the area intended close to the shading, and in each case mark and name a town which serves as a collecting centre for the product.
7. Insert on the map five dotted lines marking the limits of the time zones, that is of the belts within which standard time differs from that of Greenwich by 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 hours respectively. Number the lines in sequence from east to west and also insert and name the tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle.

HIGHER GRADE
(1930)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. The accompanying map shows a part of the Southern Uplands of Scotland. Draw a contoured sketch-map of the headstreams of the Tweed and of the Annan, and annotate your map. Compare the water-parting here with that between the headstream of the Evan Water and the Clyde.
2. The map shows part of the main railway to Carlisle; a main road fit for fast traffic; a main road fit for ordinary traffic. Describe the course of each in relation to the relief, indicating the significance of the route followed in each case. Add a note on some of the minor roadways shown.
3. Describe, illustrating by a contoured sketch-map, the precise position of Moffat, and discuss its relation to the lines of communication within the area shown.
4. What are the essential features of the geography of Scotland? Your answer should take the form of a brief, concise description such as would be useful to one who knew nothing of the country.
5. Explain, with the help of diagrams, how you could ascertain in the field the width of a broad river and the gradient of a gently-sloping bank.
6. Give a reasoned account of the main kinds of traffic carried on between the North Sea ports of Britain and Baltic ports.
7. Describe the region of the South Wales coalfield, naming the chief towns. State the chief industries carried on, and point out the advantages which the area possesses for the prosecution of these.
8. Draw a sketch-map either of the Iberian or of the Italian peninsula, and give some account of the geography of the selected area.
9. What is meant by the Mediterranean type of climate? Name the parts of the world in which this climatic type occurs, and describe briefly, with special reference to agricultural products, one area outside Europe possessing this kind of climate.
10. Discuss, with illustrative diagrams, the effects of rivers on the surface of the land.
11. Name the chief land-masses crossed by the tropic of Cancer, and give a reasoned account of the contrasts between them as regards climate and products.
12. Select one well-defined type of forest, name an area in which it occurs, and describe its characteristics, relating these to the physical conditions. State also the chief products of the forest selected.
13. Give an account, illustrated by a sketch-map, of the area drained by one of the following rivers: Mississippi-Missouri, Murray-Darling, Orange, Niger.
