HIGHER GRADE
(1939)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a Composition, not exceeding three foolscap pages in length, on any one of the following subjects: Describe your favourite hobby and state what pleasure and profit you derive from it. Narrate, in the form of a letter to a friend, any adventure which you may have had either on the sea or among the hills. “Sweet are the uses of adversity.” “A room without pictures is like a house without windows.” With this sentence as a text, write on the place of art in the home. What can you say for, and what against, modern methods of advertising? Choose one of these three suppositions and imagine the results: “If Edward II had won the battle of Bannockburn,” “if James IV had won the battle of Flodden,” “if Prince Charles Edward had won the battle of Culloden.”

HIGHER GRADE
(1939)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Summarize simply, as far as possible in your own words, the argument of the passage, limiting your answer to about half the length of the original.
2. Explain carefully the meaning of the following phrases as used in the passage: bigoted attachment, working itself clearer, the gibberish of the astrologer, harmonious systems, bold speculator.
3. Give the derivation of any five of the following words: science, navigation, political, working, deposit, delude, persecute, perfect, fragment, rector.
4. Discuss briefly the figure of speech in lines 19 to 25 (“Faint glimpses . . . deepest valley.”).
5. Write down the part of the passage that is a direct quotation from the Bible.
6. Combine the following statements into a complex sentence: But time advances; facts accumulate; doubts arise.
7. Write sentences which not only include but bring out the meanings of the following words: resourcefulness, seditious, animated, prestige, churlish, contagious, phenomenon.
8. Give an example of each of the following: simile, hyperbole, onomatopoeia, personification.
9. Punctuate and insert capitals in the following passage: no it was not me said the judge although to be quite frank with you it might have been me i believe it was glenkindie.
10. Identify the metres used in the following: And hear no more at all. Yet I doubt not through the ages one increasing purpose runs. And the sheen of his spears was like stars on the sea.

HIGHER GRADE
(1939)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 3
1. How far does Shakespeare mean us to sympathise with, and how far does he mean us to blame, any one of the following: Shylock, Brutus, Macbeth, Ophelia, Lear, Coriolanus, Richard II, Caliban, Malvolio? Discuss and illustrate this statement: “In his comedies Shakespeare was kinder to his young women than to his young men. They have fewer faults and more sense.” Describe any comic scene occurring in a Shakespearian tragedy. What purpose do you think is served by its introduction?
2. Give the names of all the clerical pilgrims in the Prologue to The Canterbury Tales, and briefly describe the character of one of them. What claim has Chaucer to be called the Father of English Poetry?
3. Comment briefly on any three of the following, giving in each case the author and his approximate date: L’Allegro, Alexander’s Feast, The Rape of the Lock, John Gilpin, Tam O’Shanter, The Lay of the Last Minstrel, Kubla Khan, The Lady of Shalott, Thyrsis, Lepanto.
4. Discuss and illustrate by quotation the patriotic element in the poetry of Burns.
5. Describe briefly the plot and the setting of a novel, either by Scott or by Stevenson, dealing with Scottish life.
6. “Wordsworth exalted and transfigured the natural and the common.” Discuss this statement and illustrate it from your reading.
7. Select an essay written by one of the following authors and briefly describe its subject matter and style: Bacon, Addison, Lamb, Hazlitt, Macaulay. What do you know of one of the following: Christian, Isaac of York, Mr. Micawber, Beatrix Esmond, Romola, Father Brown?
8. Give an account of any book you have read dealing with Scientific Research, Exploration, or Mechanical Invention.

HIGHER GRADE
(1939)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Show briefly the historical significance of five of the following: Battle of Carham; Marriage of Henry II of England; Death of the Maid of Norway; Siege of Orleans; Diet of Worms; National Covenant; Death of Charles II of Spain; Capture of Quebec; Treaty of Tilsit; Anglo-French Entente of 1904.
2. Describe briefly the settlement of the Anglo-Saxons in England and estimate their contribution to its political development. Explain the importance of Malcolm Canmore and his sons in the history of Scotland.
3. To what extent were the Emperors Frederick Barbarossa and Frederick II responsible for the decline of the Holy Roman Empire? Describe the organisation of a mediaeval English manor and explain the disappearance of villeinage. What causes tended to retard the development of stable government in either Scotland or England during the fifteenth century?
4. Describe the parts played respectively by Portugal, Spain, and England in the Age of Maritime Discovery before 1558. Explain the different courses taken by the Reformation in Scotland and in England.
5. Do you agree with the view that the Peace of Westphalia (1648) marks the beginning of a new era in Europe? Give your reasons. What were the causes of the Union of Scotland and England in 1707 and what were its principal results?
6. Discuss the historical importance of two of the following: James IV of Scotland; Sir Thomas More; Copernicus; William the Silent; John Pym; Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon; John Maitland, Duke of Lauderdale; John Churchill, Duke of Marlborough; Peter the Great; Sir Robert Walpole.
7. Do you consider that William Pitt the Younger showed himself a greater statesman before or after the outbreak of war in 1793? Trace briefly the course of the Peninsular War and estimate its influence on the fortunes of Napoleon.
8. “Peace without plenty.” How far is this a true description of conditions in Britain during the period 1815–1830? In what ways did Disraeli serve the cause of social reform?
9. To what extent does the work of Bismarck entitle him to be considered the maker of modern Germany? Trace the course of the Irish Home Rule movement between 1870 and 1914.
10. Discuss the historical importance of two of the following: George Washington; Warren Hastings; James Watt; William Cobbett; Michael Faraday; Richard Cobden; Count Cavour; Cecil Rhodes; Earl Kitchener of Khartoum; Dr. Nansen.
11. Show how Scotland has been affected by industrial changes in the twentieth century. Trace the main developments in the status of the British Dominions since 1914. What were the principal provisions of the Treaty of Versailles (1919), and to what extent have they ceased to operate?

HIGHER GRADE
(1939)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. Where was the fair held?
2. Name the various amusements of the fair.
3. What was the least popular amusement and why?
4. What noises could be heard at the fair?
5. Give the fortune-teller’s actual words to the writer.
6. Compare the interior of the fortune-teller’s grot with that of the tent occupied by the two men.
7. Describe briefly in your own words the roundabout, and the people on it; and write down the actual announcement.
8. Rewrite the last sentence (“Once .... meadow.”) in correct English.
9. Explain carefully the following phrases as used in the passage: a swirl of light, recapturing their youth, journeying to nowhere, traitors’ heads on the Tower, could languish unseen.
10. Give the meaning of the following words as used in the passage: vibrating, pillion, disposition, benign, reminiscence.
11. Select from the passage three words describing the sound of music, and distinguish shades of meaning in them.
12. Combine the following statements into a single sentence, using a principal and three subordinate clauses, or a principal clause, a participial phrase and two subordinate clauses: He had not gone far—he suddenly felt very tired—he lay down under a tree—it afforded abundant shade.
13. Give the plural of the following: tobacco, himself, son-in-law, omnibus, radius, child’s.
14. Write down the present participle of the following verbs: occur, gallop, die, hinge, quarrel, frolic.
15. Name six characters in the Bible noted respectively for strength, wisdom, patience, treachery, indecision, leadership.