HIGHER GRADE
(1947)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a Composition, not exceeding three foolscap pages in length, on any one of the following subjects: What foreign country do you most want to visit, and why? The pleasures and worries of the life and work of one of the following: a school teacher, a bus or tram conductor, a father or mother of a large family, a nurse. (Write in the first person as if you were the man or woman in question.) Describe any great work (in painting, sculpture, music, architecture, engineering, or shipbuilding) which has deeply impressed you—how you came to see or know it, and its effect on you. Describe the town, village, or country district in which you live, so as to give a clear idea of its appearance, interest, and way of life. Write in the form of a speech for the school debating society: either for or against co-education (i.e., the education of boys and girls in the same classes of the same schools).
2. Suggest, in a phrase, an appropriate title for the passage, and mention one example from history of the kind of man referred to in the passage.
3. Give, in your own words, a summary of the substance of the passage, discarding, as far as possible, the figurative language of the original. (Your summary should not exceed approximately 150 words.)
4. Explain carefully the following phrases as used in the passage: a popular tumult (lines 8-9); the merits of statesmen and of systems are freely canvassed (lines 12-13); the excitement of a party (line 15); reduced to servitude (line 16); the dearest rays of departing freedom (line 34); and give the meaning of: defection (line 8) and mythological (line 19).
5. Write down a word that is the opposite in meaning of each of the following words as they are used in the passage: seductive (line 4); indolent (line 9); necessary (line 15); swell (line 24).
6. Under what image are (i) nations represented in line 5 “broken to the curb,” and (ii) minds in lines 21-22 “which have thrown a spell on the fierce spirits of nations”?
7. Make a general analysis into clauses of the sentence “The enterprise . . . truly great man (lines 25-26). What part of speech is (i) but in line 10 ”But a community . . .” and (ii) but in line 21 “is but an imperfect type”?
8. Rewrite, with the addition of all the proper marks of punctuation, the following passage: I shall come tomorrow Sunday afternoon and I’ll bring a Bible and Shakespeare’s Tempest with me I want to read the two passages that have most impressed me in my weeks reading the concluding chapters of the book of Job the thirty eighth to the end and Prospero’s speech to Ferdinand in act 4 scene 1 beginning you do look my son in a moved sort as if you were dismayed be cheerful sir our revels now are ended.
9. Put the following passage of direct speech into indirect speech, prefixing some such phrase as “He said that”: In all my experience of the flower shows in this village (and I can now remember twenty-five) I have never seen a more magnificent display of blooms. There have been fifty more entries than last year; the membership of the Society has nearly doubled; and the funds, thanks to the care of the treasurer, are in a very satisfactory state. We can, therefore, expect that, good as this show is, next year’s will be even better.
10. Combine the following statements into a well-knit paragraph: The King of the Goths no longer dissembled his appetite for plunder and revenge—he appeared in arms under the walls of Rome—the senators of Rome had no hope of relief—they prepared a desperate resistance—they wished to delay the ruin of their country—they were unable to guard against the secret conspiracy of slaves and domestics—at midnight the slaves and domestics treacherously opened the Salarian gate—the Imperial City was delivered to the licentious fury of the tribes of Germany and Scythia.
11. Name the figures of speech that appear in the following sentences: They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
12. Name the figures of speech that appear in the following sentences: I charge you by the law. Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar.
13. Name the figures of speech that appear in the following sentences: Sceptre and crown Must tumble down, And in the dust be equal made With the poor crooked scythe and spade.
14. Name the figures of speech that appear in the following sentences: Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No; this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas incarnadine, Making the green one red.
15. Name the figures of speech that appear in the following sentences: The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham’s bosom, And Anne my wife has bid the world good-night.

HIGHER GRADE
(1947)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Choose one of the following plays: Richard II, Henry V, As You Like It, Twelfth Night, Coriolanus, The Tempest, and answer this question about it: What person or persons in it, other than the hero and heroine, specially excite your interest, and why?
2. Does Puck or Lorenzo or Horatio or Macduff or Kent play an essential part in the plot of the drama in which he figures? Could his part have been omitted without great loss to the interest of the story?
3. Answer any one of the following: Why did Shakespeare call the play of Julius Caesar by the name of a character who is not of the first importance in it? What do we learn about the situation in the Danish court from the opening scene of Hamlet? How does it start off the play and set the tone for what follows? How does Shakespeare maintain the interest in Macbeth after the crisis of the play?
4. There are certain characters among the Canterbury Pilgrims whom Chaucer respects and wants us to respect, not to laugh at. Who are they, and why did Chaucer regard them differently from the rest?
5. Explain what are the chief sources of interest and appeal in one of the following Canterbury Tales: the Knight’s, the Clerk’s, the Nun’s Priest’s, the Pardoner’s.
6. Choose one poem out of each of the two following groups of verse tales and bring out as strongly as you can obvious differences between them. (1) Isabella, Sohrab and Rustum, The Ancient Mariner, The Lady of Shalott, Marmion. (2) Tam o’Shanter, Peter Grimes, Michael, The Rape of the Lock, The Pied Piper of Hamelin.
7. Choose a pair of the following, one from each group, and contrast the pair you choose—the one as a story told mainly for something more than the narrative interest, and the other as a story told mainly as a story: (1) The Faerie Queene, Paradise Lost, The Pilgrim’s Progress, Gulliver’s Travels, Rasselas, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The Man who was Thursday; and (2) Robinson Crusoe, Old Mortality, Rob Roy, Pride and Prejudice, Jane Eyre, The Master of Ballantrae, Kipps, The Good Companions.
8. What are the kinds of subjects about which any one of the following essayists writes, and what is his attitude to them and to his reader? Bacon, Addison, Goldsmith, Lamb, Hazlitt, Carlyle, Macaulay, Robert Lynd.
9. If you wanted to commend one of the following poems to a reader of the same age and tastes as yourself: L’Allegro, An Elegy written in a Country Churchyard, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, La Belle Dame sans Merci, Adonais, Morte D’Arthur, My Last Duchess, Dauber, what reasons would you give for his or her reading the poem? What things in the poem (passages, phrases, ideas, subject-matter, and so on) would you pick out to illustrate and support your recommendation?
10. Attempt a character sketch of one of the following: Sir Anthony Absolute, Jeanie Deans, Emma, Alan Breck, Sydney Carton, Mrs. Proudie, Adam Bede, Fancy Day, Mr. Polly, Dr. Thorndyke. (Do not merely describe the plot or the part played in it by the character you choose.)
11. Choose Burns or Wordsworth or Keats or Tennyson, and illustrate from poems by the poet you choose his skill and precision in describing natural objects and appearances (large or small, animate or inanimate).
12. What do you know about the life and works of any author whom you have read at home and who is a favourite of yours? What qualities in his or her work make a special appeal to you?
13. Mention (quoting where you can) and comment on passages in the Bible that are remarkable examples of each of the following: pure narrative; the dramatic; lyrical beauty; and moving eloquence.

LOWER GRADE
(1947)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. What effects did the Roman occupation have upon Britain at the time? To what extent did these prove permanent?
2. What grounds are there for regarding Henry II as the greatest of the Plantagenets?
3. Write notes on two of the following: The Danelaw, Malcolm Canmore, Magna Carta, the Black Death, John Wycliffe, James I of Scotland.
4. What do you know of the main voyages of discovery undertaken in the second half of the fifteenth century?
5. Why did England and Spain go to war in the reign of Elizabeth and with what results?
6. Explain the main subjects of dispute between King and Parliament in the reign of James I of Great Britain.
7. What were the causes of the Act of Union of 1707, and what were its main provisions?
8. Trace the chief events of the Jacobite Rising of 1745, and show the effects of its failure on the life of the Highlands.
9. Explain the causes of the revolt of the American colonies.
10. What were the grievances of the French people on the eve of the Revolution of 1789?
11. What were the conditions which justify the description of the years which followed 1815 as “a period of unprecedented depression and discontent”?
12. Explain the causes and the results of the Crimean War.
13. Do you consider that Gladstone or Disraeli rendered the greater services to Britain?
14. Write notes on two of the following: Horatio, Viscount Nelson, William Wilberforce, the Repeal of the Corn Laws, Daniel O’Connell, Giuseppe Garibaldi, Abraham Lincoln, Cecil Rhodes, the Statute of Westminster (1931).
15. What steps have been taken since the Indian Mutiny to give Indians an increasing share in the government of India? Do you consider that the League of Nations was a complete failure? Trace the history of the Trade Union movement from 1867 to the present day.

HIGHER GRADE
(1947)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. What do you know of the different peoples which inhabited Scotland in early times, and how did they come to be united in one kingdom of Scotland?
2. Explain the effects of the Norman Conquest on the government and society of England.
3. Magna Carta has been called “the palladium of English liberty”. What do you know of the circumstances in which it was granted, and why is it considered so important?
4. Illustrate and account for the social unrest in England in the fourteenth century.
5. Write notes on two of the following: Society in Roman Britain, The Synod of Whitby, David I, the Model Parliament of 1295, the Merchant Adventurers, Warwick the Kingmaker.
6. Do you agree with the view that Henry VIII was the most powerful monarch who ever sat on the English throne? Give reasons for your view.
7. Estimate the historical importance of the reign of Mary Queen of Scots, 1542-67.
8. Explain the religious settlement of Queen Elizabeth and show by whom and for what reasons it was opposed during her reign.
9. Why did the Scots join the English Parliament in 1643, and join Charles I in 1647?
10. Explain the importance of the seventeenth century in the history of the colonies.
11. On what grounds may Sir Robert Walpole be considered a great statesman?
12. How far is it fair to blame George III and Lord North for the loss of the American colonies?
13. What effects did the French Revolution and the subsequent outbreak of war with France have on the domestic affairs of Britain?
14. Explain the economic policy of Sir Robert Peel and estimate its value for Britain.
15. Trace the progress of factory legislation in the nineteenth century.
16. Discuss the opinion that Gladstone’s best work was done before 1880.
17. Describe the chief stages in the constitutional development of Canada from 1763 to 1914.
18. Write notes on two of the following: Henry Grattan, the People’s Charter, the Marquis of Dalhousie, the Congress of Berlin (1878), the Franco-British Entente of 1904, the Union of South Africa Act.

LOWER GRADE
(1947)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of part of the British Isles: Draw two lines across Scotland to denote the most important fault lines. Over each of the regions into which Scotland is thus divided write a suitable descriptive name for the region. Shade all areas which have an average annual rainfall of less than 30 inches. Write WHEAT over two areas where wheat is grown fairly extensively. Indicate the routes followed by all the main railway lines from England to Edinburgh and to Glasgow. Mark and name two towns important for the manufacture of linen. Insert the regional names Buchan and Galloway. Write F over two areas noted for fruit farming.
2. On the accompanying map of N. and S. America: Name the rivers Mackenzie, Ohio, Orinoco, Parana. Name Chile, Alberta, Jamaica, Uruguay. Delimit carefully two areas of tropical grasslands and two of temperate grasslands, marking each “tropical” or “temperate” as the case may be. Name each of the grasslands shown. Insert the 32° F. January isotherm (reduced to sea-level). Write O over two areas which are major producers of mineral oil, one in N. America and one in S. America.
3. Examine the contour map on page 4 of the map sheet. The scale is 1:100,000. What does this mean? On this scale, how many miles (correct to one decimal place) are represented by 1 inch? Write, in about ten lines, a general description of the build of the area shown. Suggest reasons why the settlement, N, has become the main town of the area.
4. Give an explanatory account of life throughout the year either in the Barren Lands (Arctic fringe) of Canada or in the Steppes of the Asiatic territories of the U.S.S.R.
5. What do you understand by the terms isobar and isohyet? Temperature maps are sometimes marked “actual,” sometimes “reduced to sea-level.” What is the difference? From January to July, any particular isotherm moves north and moves more rapidly over land than over water. Give an explanation of the two facts italicized in this quotation.
6. Write a short essay describing (with examples) how mountains influence human affairs.
7. Show how the journeys of three of the following extended Europe’s knowledge of the geography of the world: Marco Polo; Vasco da Gama; Magellan; Orellana; Cook; Mungo Park.
8. Quote the mean January temperature, the mean July temperature, and the mean annual rainfall of the area in which your school is situated. State also the relatively wet and relatively dry months. Name an area of England or Wales which has a climate rather different from that of your own area. Contrast the farming activities of the two areas, showing how the differences are determined by climate and (possibly) by relief.
9. Draw a sketch-map of the north of England to include Lancashire, Yorkshire, and the counties to the north. Mark carefully the upland areas and the coalfields, naming each. Write notes on the industrial development of one of the coalfields, mentioning the main industrial towns; and the importance of one of the gaps between or through the upland areas shown.
10. Three of the main imports of South Wales are wheat, timber, and metal ores. From which ports are each of these cargoes likely to come, and to which ports do they go? What are the precise needs which these cargoes serve?
11. Draw a sketch-map of Europe showing the continent divided into five or six climatic regions. Give a suitable name to the climatic type of each of the regions, and write notes on the climatic characteristics of two of the regions.
12. Select two areas of Europe, each of considerable size, one with a very high density of industrial population, the other with a very high density of agricultural population, and explain the high density in each case.
13. “Fortunate in her coastlines, France is unfortunate in her land frontiers.” Discuss this statement, assuming pre-1939 boundaries.
14. Divide one of the following into farming regions, and write explanatory notes on the agriculture of each of the regions. Illustrate by a sketch-map: The Mississippi-Missouri basin; The Indo-Gangetic Plain; South Island, New Zealand; Africa south of Orange River and Durban, i.e., Cape Province and Southern Natal.
15. Japan is sometimes called “the Britain of the East.” What are the striking parallels in the geography of the two countries, and what are the notable differences?
16. Write notes on three of the following: the “White Australia” policy; Artesian water supplies in Australia; the Great Barrier Reef; Australian forests; agricultural products of the Pacific coastland of Queensland.

HIGHER GRADE
(1947)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. After studying the map, give a brief and broad description of the build of the area shown, distinguishing three main regions. How is the distribution of population (in villages and in scattered dwellings) related to relief? Write a note on the north-eastern end of the reservoir, Llyn Cowlyd. Compare—briefly—the courses followed by the river, road, and railway through the Vale of Conway. What are likely to be the main occupations of the people at or near Capel-Curig (D2)? Why?
2. On the accompanying map of North and South America: Indicate by arrows the main coastal currents and drifts north of the Equator, and name them. Delimit carefully two areas of tropical grasslands and two of temperate grasslands, marking each “tropical” or “temperate” as the case may be. Name each of the grasslands shown. Put a ring round each of two areas of South America where the annual rainfall is small. Mark each area “dry.” Insert and name the Panama, Soo, and Welland Canals.