Higher Grade
1948
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. The difficulty of choosing Christmas presents.
2. “There is no accounting for tastes.” With this proverb in mind, write an essay as if you were one of the following caterers to the public: a programme official of the B.B.C.; a manager of a cinema; a librarian in a public library; a restaurant keeper.
3. A description (real or imaginary) of one of the following: a snowstorm, a shipwreck, a destructive fire, a flood.
4. What local question is causing discussion in your district? State the question at issue clearly and impartially, and give some of the chief arguments on both sides.
5. A letter recommending one or more hobbies, with reasons for the choice, to one of the following: a boy or girl fond of living things; a boy or girl living in a remote and lonely place; a boy or girl who is clever with his or her hands; a boy or girl with an interest in history or geography.

Higher Grade
1948
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. (a) Suggest a brief and appropriate title for the passage.
(b) Into how many sections does the passage naturally fall? Give the first two and the last two words of each section.
(c) Explain carefully the following phrases as they are used in the passage: were first reclaimed from wildness; all the suitable material has been long since worked out; every animal of any pretensions; though half unconsciously.
(d) (i) Give the meaning of the following words as they are used in the passage: submit; hypothesis; stringent. (ii) Write down a word that is opposite in meaning to each of the following words: ancestors; subsequent; rude. (iii) Distinguish shades of meaning in the following words: barbarian, barbarous, barbaric.
(e) (i) Make a general analysis into clauses of the sentence: The failure...worked out. (ii) What part of the verb is each of these words: doing; following. (iii) Write down the singular of species and the plural of hypothesis.
(f) Name the figure of speech used in the sentence: My conclusion...man. Comment on the aptness of its use in this passage.
(g) Make a summary of the passage, bringing out the main points of the argument as clearly and succinctly as you can.
2. (a) Rewrite, with the addition of all the proper marks of punctuation, the following passage.
(b) Combine the substance of the following statements into a well-knit paragraph.
3. Write sentences which not only include but bring out clearly the meaning of any five of the following words: rhythmical; insistent; alloy; parasite; allude; perforate; long-term; recess; gruesome; absorb.

Higher Grade
1948
ENGLISH
PAPER: 3
1. (a) What sort of person did Shakespeare mean any one of the following to be: Falstaff, Richard II, Bassanio, Polonius, Banquo, Edmund, Coriolanus? Is the man you choose good or bad, wise or foolish, likable or unlikable?
(b) If in an amateur performance of one of the following plays—Julius Caesar, As You Like It, Twelfth Night, The Tempest—you were given your choice of a character, whom would you choose and why?
(c) What supernatural elements does Shakespeare introduce into any one of the following plays: A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Julius Caesar, Hamlet, Macbeth, The Tempest? Show to what extent the supernatural is apparent to the human persons in the play.
2. (a) Choose two of the Canterbury Pilgrims and write in prose an account of them based on Chaucer's portraits.
(b) Illustrate from any one of The Canterbury Tales or from The Prologue Chaucer's sly humour.
3. What was the occasion of the writing of Lycidas by Milton? Show how the poet clothes the real incident in pastoral imagery.
4. (a) Write a character-sketch and history of Bridget Elia as you have come to know her in The Essays of Elia.
(b) Give an account of the oddities of behaviour and opinion of Sir Roger de Coverley.
5. Choose any one of Sir Walter Scott’s novels and describe any scene or incident in it that has particularly appealed to you.
6. Explain as intelligibly as possible the story or the situation in any one of the following poems: Alexander’s Feast, The Rape of the Lock, The Bard, The Cotter’s Saturday Night, Resolution and Independence, An Ode to the West Wind, The Eve of St. Agnes, Horatius, The Forsaken Merman, The Revenge.
7. Do you know any book (novel or not novel) which describes a district with which you are familiar? Is it successful in catching the character and spirit of the place?
8. Say frankly whether you like Wordsworth’s Poetry or not, and give your reasons.
9. Choose any one of the following: Lemuel Gulliver, Sam Weller, Elizabeth Bennet, Jos Sedley, Maggie Tulliver, Count Fosco, John Loveday, Dr. Jekyll, Salvation Yeo, Dr. Watson—and describe the chosen one’s appearance, character, and role in the book in which he or she figures.
10. Have you ever read a second (third, fourth, etc.) book or poem by an author because you had greatly enjoyed the first of his that you read? What were the books or poems? What qualities in them attracted you?

Lower Grade
1948
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Trace the successive stages in the conversion of Britain to Christianity.
2. Why did England go to war with France in the fourteenth century? How far was she successful before the death of Edward III?
3. Write notes on two of the following: Agricola; St. Margaret of Scotland; Thomas Becket; Robert the Bruce; the Peasants’ Revolt; markets and fairs in the Middle Ages.
4. In what ways did Henry VII increase the power of the Crown?
5. Describe everyday life in either an English town in the reign of Elizabeth or a Scottish burgh in the reign of Mary.
6. Explain the causes of the Civil War (1642-1646) and account for the Parliamentary victory.
7. What were the main changes in government and religion in England effected by the Revolution of 1688?
8. Trace the career of the elder Pitt to 1763, showing the special qualities which place him among our greatest statesmen.
9. What industries (other than transport) were most affected by the Industrial Revolution, and in what ways?
10. “The hungry forties.” How far, and on what grounds, do you agree with this description of the years 1840-1846?
11. Explain the causes of the American Civil War (1861-1865) and show the significance of the result.
12. Trace the steps by which the franchise was extended during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
13. Why were Britain and France unfriendly during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, and why did this unfriendliness give place to the Entente of 1904?
14. Write notes on two of the following: John Wesley; the Stamp Act; the Duke of Wellington; the Durham Report; the Disruption of the Church of Scotland; the Congress of Berlin; Charles Stewart Parnell; David Lloyd George.
15. (a) Explain the working of cabinet government in Britain.
(b) Discuss the main economic problems that confront Scotland today.
(c) Describe the origin and the main features of the United Nations Organization.

Higher Grade
1948
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Describe life in Britain during the Roman occupation.
2. What were the problems that faced Henry II on his accession? What measures did he take for dealing with them?
3. Explain the causes of the Scottish War of Independence, and account for the final success of the Scots.
4. Explain the circumstances that led to the break-up of the manorial system.
5. Write notes on two of the following: St. Augustine of Canterbury; Cnut; David I of Scotland; Stephen Langton; the Provisions of Oxford; the Lollards.
6. On what grounds can modern English history be said to begin with the reign of Henry VII?
7. In what respects did the Reformation in Scotland differ in character from the Reformation in England?
8. Describe English commercial development in the reign of Elizabeth.
9. Compare the services rendered to Rome by Pompey and by Julius Caesar.
10. Describe the Roman system of provincial administration in the first century A.D.
11. Explain the importance of the duchy of Burgundy in the latter half of the fifteenth century.
12. “The success of the Reformation spelt the ruin of the Holy Roman Empire.” How far do you agree with this statement?
13. Trace the rise of Sweden to the rank of a great power and account for its decline.
14. “The reputation of Louis XIV would have been greater if he had died before 1685.” How far do you agree?
15. Do you consider that the ambition of Frederick II of Prussia was the sole cause of the War of the Austrian Succession?
16. Explain the political and social grievances which led to the French Revolution.
17. Describe the chief stages in the relations between Turkey and the European powers between 1815 and 1839.
18. “Blood and iron.” Do you consider this phrase a satisfactory description of the methods of Bismarck?
19. Explain the international rivalries which led to the War of 1914-1918.
20. Write notes on two of the following: the Emperor Joseph II; the Treaty of Tilsit; the Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815-1830); Mazzini; Louis Blanc; the Zollverein.

Lower Grade
1948
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of part of the British Isles: (a) Show and name four of the main coalfields of Britain. (b) Delimit two areas where the population density is very high. (c) Mark Edinburgh and Leeds, and show the Waverley-Midland Route. (d) Mark a limestone ridge which crosses England. (e) Mark two passenger steamship routes between Ireland and Great Britain.
2. On the accompanying map of the lands surrounding the Indian Ocean: (a) Write DRY, WINTER, SUMMER, ALL, TWO over appropriate areas. (b) Write OIL over two major oilfields. (c) Mark and name four entrepots. (d) Name Tasmania, Sumatra, Madagascar, and Mozambique, stating the Empire of which each forms a part.
3. Examine the contour map on page 4 of the map sheet: (a) Write a broad general description of the build of the area shown. (b) Suggest reasons why a town has developed at S. (c) Comment on the position of the road SPQBU. (d) If the map measures 5½ inches by 7, what area of territory is shown?
4. Distinguish between transhumance and nomadism. Describe, with reference to a specific example in each case, how geographical conditions lead to the movements of the people.
5. What are the conditions necessary for the cultivation and harvesting of cotton or tea? Give a broad account of the world distribution of the crop selected.
6. Explain with the help of diagrams: (a) Why it is warmer at the Equator than at high latitudes. (b) Why the interval between sunrise and sunset varies with the seasons but not at the Equator.
7. Describe, with reference to a specific example in each case, the main characteristics of the build, drainage, and soil of a dissected plateau and an alluvial plain. Indicate how the physical characteristics influence human affairs.
8. Write a short essay showing how a serious deficiency in British coal production tends to bring about restrictions in our food supply, difficulties for our manufacturing industries, and a reduced standard of living.
9. Describe broadly the characteristics of the climate of your home area. Write notes showing how three of the following differ in climate from your home area: Cork, Dublin, Lowestoft, Braemar, Lerwick, Southampton.
10. Account for the distribution of people in one of the following areas: The Scottish Lowlands; England north of the Mersey-Humber; Wales; Ireland (Eire and Northern Ireland).
11. “Although geographically different, Norway and Denmark are much akin.” Expand and discuss this statement.
12. Write notes on the position and importance of three of the following: Basle; Coblenz; Essen; Hamburg; Istanbul; Madrid; Marseilles; Milan; Vienna.
13. Contrast the climate of two of the following areas, and mention the main agricultural products: The Plain of Lombardy; The Paris Basin; The Basin of the Vistula; S.W. Spain.
14. Suppose that you had recently spent a whole year on a farm in one of the following areas: The Lake Peninsula of Canada; Southern Manitoba; a valley of western Nova Scotia; the Australian Riverina; the eastern coastal plain of North Island, New Zealand; the south-western part of Cape Province, South Africa. Write a geographical essay describing your impressions.
15. Draw a sketch-map of N. America showing the main physical regions. Give a general description of the build of one of these regions and write a brief note on the rest.
16. “Africa remained for long the Dark Continent, so great were the obstacles which impeded exploration of the interior.” Mention the kinds of obstacles and illustrate by examples.

Higher Grade
1948
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 2
1. Write explanatory notes on two of the following: the development of an industrial estate; the localization of premises within a city; the decline of a particular industry; the importance of a river as a barrier; the position of a minor railway junction; the decline of a small port; the declining population of a parish; the cultivation of wheat; fluctuations in the height of the moorland edge.
2. Describe broadly the scenery of two of the following areas: South Downs; Peak District; Grampian Highlands; Southern Uplands of Scotland; the Fens.
3. “British industries which depend on the New World tend naturally to be located in the west of the British Isles.” Discuss and illustrate.
4. Give an explanatory account of the density-distribution of population in the Great European Plain from the North Sea to the Urals. Illustrate by a sketch-map.
5. Give a brief account of the Alps and of their importance in the geography of Europe, mentioning their build, land utilization, and importance as a watershed and barrier.
6. Select two of the following pairs and show how they resemble or differ: Finland and Quebec; Belgium and Saxony; Portugal and North Island, New Zealand.
7. What geographical factors contribute to the rapid growth of the U.S.S.R., and what factors impede its development?
8. Show how the farming activities of the Indo-Gangetic Plain are related to climate. Illustrate by a sketch-map.
9. Discuss the similarities in situation between the capitals Ottawa, Washington, and Canberra, and between the largest towns Montreal, New York, and Sydney.
10. What are the main colonial territories of France or Holland? Estimate their importance to the motherland.
11. Draw a map of the western coastland of South America showing the main climatic regions. Write descriptive notes on each region.
12. Give a concise account of the geography of Japan or Palestine.
