LOWER GRADE
1955
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about three foolscap pages in length on any one of the following subjects: (a) A description of a visit paid to one of the following: a circus; a bird sanctuary; a ceilidh; highland games; an agricultural show; a pageant; a regatta; the launching of a ship. (b) Suppose that you have been asked to address an adult society in your neighbourhood on “My School.” Write your speech. (c) Imagine that at the end of your school career you win a prize which is intended to enable you to visit a foreign country. What country would you choose to visit, and why? (d) What would you like, and what would you dislike, in the life of one of the following: an errand boy; a village policeman; a school secretary; a shepherd; a fisherman; a clerk in an office or bank; a shop girl; a worker in a garage; a factory employee.

LOWER GRADE
1955
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Read through the passage printed above and then answer the following questions on it: (a) Express in your own words the meaning of each of the following phrases as they are used in the passage: with profound respect; restored the Scottish monarchy; thoughts wisely and boldly for his country's deliverance. (b) Suggest single words which might have been used in place of the following phrases: remained alive; falling down; broken to pieces; a little while ago; winding sheet. Give an alternative phrase for one after another. (c) Form adjectives from fragment, sepulchre, monument, respect; a noun from inter; and a verb from tomb. (d) Give a general analysis of the sentence: "So orders were sent... profound respect." (e) Why was the exact place of burial forgotten? (f) What led to the discovery, and why was the identity of the skeleton certain? (g) What were the memories which made the spectators weep? Point out in the passage two other signs of Scottish admiration for Bruce. (h) Tell briefly, in the first person, the story of the discovery, as it might have been recounted by one of the workmen. (i) Suggest a title for the passage.
2. Write a short letter acknowledging the receipt of a catalogue which you have asked a large general store to send to you, and expressing your appreciation of the contents.
3. Write an account of one of the following: (a) Shylock’s plan for revenge; (b) Rosalind's adventures in Arden; (c) the plot against Malvolio; (d) the conspiracy against Julius Caesar; (e) the fencing-match in “Hamlet”; (f) the murder of Duncan; (g) the triumph of Prospero.
4. Choose one poem which describes a journey (by land or sea), or a desperate fight, or a shipwreck, or a beautiful scene. Give the author’s name, outline the content of the poem, and bring out any points in it which have interested you.
5. Taking any novel which you have enjoyed reading, show how the author gives his story a happy ending, or a sad ending, as the case may be.
6. Describe in your own words an incident full of excitement or danger from a prose book (novel, biography, or book of adventure) which you have read.
7. Select two passages, one showing (a) the more humorous side, and one showing (b) the more serious side of one of the following writers: Chaucer; Addison; Goldsmith; Burns; Lamb. Write a very brief account of the content of the passages and say why you think your choice is a good one.

HIGHER GRADE
1955
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about three foolscap pages in length on any one of the following subjects: (a) What attractions—historical, civic, industrial, scenic—would you take a visitor from another country to see in your town or village or county? (b) “Myself ten years hence”. (c) Do you think that it is a good thing for young men to put in a period of national service? Or: Do you think that young women as well as young men should be compelled to put in a period of national service? (d) A description of any one of the following: a visit to a foreign country as a member of a school party; an industrial exhibition; your ideal classroom; a street accident; the best hour of the day; your most amusing experience. (e) “Peace hath her victories no less renowned than war.” Using this quotation as a text, describe some of the benefits that mankind has obtained from the work done in any one of the following fields: medicine, exploration, mechanical invention, social reform.
2. Read through the passage printed above and then answer the following questions on it: (a) Explain briefly but clearly the meaning of the following phrases as they are used in the passage: his effect upon the universe; exemplify his true character; the degree of his deficiencies; on this side the flood. What is meant by ancient heroes? Illustrate by giving one example. (b) Give the meaning of the following words as they are used in the passage: species; talents; practicable. What is the origin of the use of the word talents? Give the opposites of the words defects and vices. Suggest a single noun that means the story of one’s own life written by oneself, and a single adjective that means before the flood. (c) State the kind of each of the following clauses: what were the true limits of his talents; though it might be dull; as will make it expressive. Choose from the passage one example of each of the following: an adjectival phrase; an adverbial phrase of place; a gerund. Comment briefly on the use of will in what we will tell, and on the use of shall in their characteristic elements shall be shown. (d) Express in your own words, as tersely and intelligibly as you can, the substance or drift of the last sentence. (e) Make a summary of the passage in two paragraphs, bringing out clearly the distinction between the two kinds of biography referred to.
3. Combine the following statements into a compact, well-constructed paragraph: The eagle drew near with his prey—he saw his mate winging some way off—a large duck hung from her talons—they met at the edge of the nest—their half-hedged nestlings thrust up gaping beaks to greet them—the parent birds fed choice morsels to these beaks—the nestlings were only about half the size of their parents—their appetites were prodigious—they devoured their meal greedily—the food disappeared in a few moments—their hunger was assuaged—the old birds flew off to forage for themselves—they left behind on the threshold of their home a heap of bones and feathers.
4. (a) Write a short letter to a newspaper (local or national) in reply to a suggestion that boys and girls should refuse to surrender their seats to their elders in crowded buses or trams. Or: (b) Write a short letter to the manager of the local cinema asking that a larger proportion of British films should be shown.

HIGHER GRADE
1955
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. (a) “The heroines of Shakespeare’s comedies are young women of considerable independence of character.” Discuss this statement with reference to any one of the comedies. Or: (b) “A great play should sustain the interest of the readers or spectators, win their sympathy, and leave them with something to think about.” Discuss this view with reference to any one of Shakespeare’s tragedies. Or: (c) Choose any one of the following topics; develop it as fully as you can: (i) Is Lady Macbeth entirely in Macbeth’s confidence? (ii) Do all the characters in Hamlet think that the hero of the play is mad? (iii) Who is the real hero of the play that bears the name of Julius Caesar? (iv) In what characters in the play is King Lear able to inspire devotion? (v) For what reasons does Caliban arouse our sympathy?
2. (a) Select one of the following pairs of pilgrims from Chaucer’s Prologue to the Canterbury Tales, and contrast the two characters: (i) The Prioress and the Wife of Bath; (ii) The Monk and the Poor Parson; (iii) The Friar and the Clerk of Oxenford. Or: (b) “Chaucer loves to embellish a tale with matter or comment not strictly relevant to the story as a story.” Discuss and illustrate this statement with reference to any one of the Canterbury Tales.
3. “In L’Allegro and Il Penseroso the ear predominates over the eye.” Do you agree that in these poems Milton has assigned more importance to sounds than to sights? Illustrate your answer by quotation.
4. Choose any one of the following works, assign a date to the author, and explain why the work selected holds a prominent place in the prose literature of our country: Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress; Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels; Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe; Boswell’s Life of Dr. Johnson; Fronde’s English Seamen in the Sixteenth Century; Newman’s Apologia pro vita sua; Arnold’s Essays in Criticism.
5. Give the name of an essay (and of the author) dealing with one of the following subjects and then write a fairly full account of the essay you choose: gardens, schooldays, country life, life in London, travel, an historical character, rooks, memories.
6. (a) What features of the story, description, and language have you found to be particularly moving in any one of the following poems: Lycidas, Elegy written in a Country Churchyard, The Deserted Village, Michael, Marmion, Morte d’Arthur, Ulysses, Sohrab and Rustum? Or: (b) Discuss the poet’s treatment of the main character in any one of the following poems: Alexander’s Feast, The Rape of the Lock, The Bard, Tam o’ Shanter, The Ancient Mariner, Isabella, The Pied Piper of Hamelin, The Bishop orders his Tomb at St. Praxed’s Church.
7. Many novelists make use of their knowledge of a particular geographical region or of a particular class in society. Name any novelist who seems to you to do this and describe the picture he (or she) gives us of the particular region or class.
8. From your knowledge of the poetry of Burns or Wordsworth or Shelley discuss the poet’s attitude to birds or flowers.
9. Select one of the following characters, give the name of the book in which he or she appears and of the author of the book, and then trace briefly the part played in the story by the character you choose: Dinah Morris, Edie Ochiltree, Alan Breck, Wilkins Micawber, Emma Woodhouse, Beatrix Esmond, Henry Gow, Soames Forsyte, Meg Merrilies, Mark Tapley, Angel Clare.
10. Choose any book (other than a novel) dealing with Scottish history, Scottish life, Scottish character, or Scottish scenery; give a short account of it, mentioning particularly the features in the book that have most strongly appealed to you.

LOWER GRADE
1955
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Describe briefly how either Scotland or England came to be united under one ruler.
2. Write notes on two of the following: Agricola, Domesday Book, Thomas Becket, Edward I’s Scottish policy, the Scottish parliament in the later Middle Ages, the causes of the Wars of the Roses.
3. Do you consider either Henry VII of England or James IV of Scotland to have been a great king? Give reasons.
4. Trace in outline the main events from the accession of Mary Stewart which led up to the Treaty of Edinburgh. What justification is there for calling that treaty a turning point in Scottish history?
5. Give an account of England’s relations with Spain in the reigns of Mary and Elizabeth Tudor.
6. Describe Charles I’s financial expedients from his accession to the summoning of the Long Parliament. State very briefly any causes of trouble other than financial.
7. Give an account of Cromwell’s domestic policy after the expulsion of the Rump and explain why the Commonwealth came to an end.
8. Trace and explain the events of James II’s reign that led to the Revolution of 1688.
9. What were the main achievements in home and foreign affairs of Queen Anne’s reign? Does the reign deserve to be called a glorious one?
10. Give an account of the British and French colonies on the mainland of North America about the year 1750 and show what advantages each side possessed.
11. By what methods did the farmers of either Scotland or England increase production in the eighteenth century?
12. State briefly why Britain and France went to war in 1793. What part did Britain play in the war up to 1802?
13. Give reasons why there was a demand for parliamentary reform in the years preceding 1832, and show how far the Reform Act of 1832 met that demand.
14. What were the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1856) and what were the further developments in the Eastern Question up to the Treaty of Berlin?
15. How do you account for the success of the Liberals in the election of 1906? What were their main achievements in home affairs up to 1914?
16. Write notes on two of the following: (1) The causes of Lord Durham’s mission to Canada. (2) The construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway and its importance. (3) The causes of the Great Trek. (4) Paul Kruger.
17. Write notes on two of the following: The effects of the rebellion of 1745 on the Highlands, the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, James Watt, Robert Owen, Abraham Lincoln, Disraeli’s domestic policy, the Treaty of Versailles (1919).
18. Either: Give an account of the projects for the defence of Western Europe proposed since the second world war. Or: What problems have confronted the British Empire in Africa (apart from the Union of South Africa) since 1945? Or: To what extent have economic problems in Scotland in the twentieth century been distinct from those in England?

HIGHER GRADE
1955
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. What contributions did Alfred make to the development of England?
2. Estimate the importance for Scotland of the reigns of Malcolm Canmore and his sons.
3. “Edward I meant to be a great king and he was.” Do you consider that he was?
4. What do you know of the medieval town in either England or Scotland?
5. Write notes on two of the following: the Romans in Scotland—Domesday Book—medieval agriculture in Scotland or England—John Balliol—the Black Death—Cardinal Beaufort.
6. “The Reformation in England was at once a political, a religious and a social event.” On what grounds can this opinion be defended?
7. How far was the foreign policy of Elizabeth I based upon concern for Protestantism?
8. Do you consider that the Civil War was due mainly to the unwise policy of Charles I?
9. Account for the changed relations of Charles II with the Cavalier Parliament between its election and its dissolution.
10. How far did (a) England and (b) Scotland gain or lose by the Union of 1707 in the fifty years that followed.
11. Why was Britain more successful in the Seven Years War than in the War of the Austrian Succession?
12. Do you consider that in domestic affairs the Younger Pitt was on the whole more liberal or reactionary?
13. Do you consider the reforms of the years 1822-1829 or those of 1830-1835 to have been the more beneficial?
14. Why have the years 1840-1846 been called the “hungry 'forties” and why did conditions improve thereafter?
15. Either: Compare the importance of Lord William Bentinck and the Marquis of Dalhousie in the history of India. Or: To what extent had Canada become a nation by 1914?
16. Discuss the view that the Gladstone government of 1880-1885 was a failure.
17. Show the chief stages in the development of the Trade Union movement from the mid-nineteenth century to 1914.
18. Write notes on two of the following: John Wesley—Henry Grattan—Edward Gibbon Wakefield—the Jameson Raid—Joseph Chamberlain—the Russo-British Agreement of 1907.

HIGHER GRADE
1955
HISTORY
PAPER: 2
1. Describe briefly the Persians’ war against Greece in 480-479 B.C. and account for the failure of the Persians.
2. Compare the political systems of Athens and Sparta at the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War. Which seems to you the better?
3. Describe the constitution of the Roman Republic at the beginning of the first century B.C.
4. “There has never been a more valuable government than that of Augustus Caesar.” On what grounds does he deserve high praise as a ruler?
5. Compare the importance of the Emperors Diocletian and Constantine in the history of the Roman Empire.
6. Write notes on two of the following: The Ionian Revolt; Pericles; Greek Drama; Dionysius of Syracuse; the Second Punic War; Caius Gracchus.
7. Describe briefly the barbarian invasions of the fifth century.
8. “The twelfth-century renaissance.” Can this term be justified?
9. Discuss the view that Philip IV of France completed the work begun by Philip II (Augustus).
10. “The policy of Emperor Frederick II involved the end of German unity.” Discuss this statement.
11. Explain the causes of the Conciliar movement in the Church of the fifteenth century and show why it was not more successful.
12. Write notes on two of the following: The Partition of Verdun; Normans in Italy and Sicily; Otto the Great; the Union of Kalmar; Joan of Arc; the Visconti of Milan.
13. Estimate the debt of the Continental Reformation to the Renaissance.
14. Trace and account for the successful rising of the Dutch Netherlands.
15. Explain the steps by which Sweden became a great power in the seventeenth century.
16. How far was the foreign policy of Louis XIV in the best interests of France?
17. Do you consider that Frederick the Great bears the chief share of responsibility for the European Wars of 1740-48 and 1756-63?
18. Write notes on two of the following: Charles VIII’s invasion of Italy; The foundation of the Jesuit Order; Frederick, Elector Palatine; John Sobieski; Cardinal Alberoni; The War of the Polish Succession.
19. To what extent did Austrian and Russian interests agree or differ between the end of the Seven Years’ War and the third Partition of Poland?
20. “If the conquests of Napoleon were ephemeral, his civilian work in France was built upon granite.” Discuss this opinion.
21. Explain the merits and defects of the Congress