LOWER GRADE
(1960)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about three pages in length on any one of the following subjects: (a) The Garden in Spring and in Autumn. (b) My First Play or My First Film or My First Football Match. (c) “A policeman's lot is not a happy one.” Is this true? (d) Describe a radio or a television programme which particularly appeals to you, and give reasons for your choice. (e) The joy of possessing a new book or a new camera or a new dress or a new suit of clothes or a new bicycle or a new set of golf clubs or a new kit of tools or a new tennis racket. (f) A story in which the outcome turns upon the toss of a coin. (g) Describe an incident in which Macavity might have taken part.

LOWER GRADE
(1960)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Read the passage printed above and then answer the following questions on it: (a) Express in your own words the meaning of each of the following phrases as they are used in the passage. (b) Give the meaning of each of the following words as they are used in the passage. (c) Give the name and the relation of each of the following clauses. (d) Name the part of speech and indicate the relation of each of the following words. (e) Explain clearly the difference between a “circus” and a “menagerie.” (f) Describe in your own words the atmosphere of calm created by elephants in the bush. (g) From the material supplied in the passage describe in your own words the kind of country in which elephants are found. (h) Mention one way in which the African elephant differs physically from the Indian elephant. (i) Give a fairly detailed account of the feelings of the author as he observes the elephants in their natural surroundings.
2. Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper either approving of or protesting against one of the following decisions.
3. Describe either an amusing or a moving scene from any Shakespeare play you have read.
4. Give an account of any poem you have read which deals with one of the following subjects: the sea; country life; war; love; animals; attachment to one’s homeland.
5. In your own words describe one of the following, selected from any novel or autobiographical prose work you have read: a journey or a voyage; a storm; a fight; a rescue; an unexpected piece of good fortune; a disappointment; a departure from home.
6. Give the title, and the name of the author, of any essay which you have enjoyed reading. Describe briefly what the author has to say about his subject. What did you particularly like about the essay?
7. Give the titles, and name the authors, of three non-fiction prose works which you would like to take with you on a holiday. Write an account of any one of the three books.

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 1
1. Write a composition of about three pages in length on any one of the following subjects: (a) “A man thinks as his newspaper directs him.” Discuss. (b) The trials and satisfactions of family life. (c) “A man’s (or woman’s) most important asset is a sense of humour.” Discuss. (d) A description of a visit to one of the following: a great cathedral; a country church; an archaeological or historical site; a mansion house or castle open to the public; an airport; a court of law; the annual show of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland; the Scottish Industries Exhibition, 1959. (e) “It would be very much better if scientists, instead of sending rockets to the moon and shooting monkeys into space, concentrated on making life more bearable and noiseless on earth.” Do you agree? (f) If you were a film producer with almost unlimited money and resources at your disposal, which aspects of Scottish life, or which Scottish book or books, would you choose to film? (g) An explanatory and critical commentary on one of the following: jazz; modern art; Scottish Country Dancing; modern fashions; modern architecture. (h) Problems, with some suggested solutions, of road and rail traffic at the present time.

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
ENGLISH
PAPER: 2
1. Answer all three Questions. (a) How far is this true of any Shakespearean comedy you have read? (b) Show, with reference to one of Shakespeare’s tragic heroes, how far he is “betrayed by what is false within,” and how far he is the victim of circumstances. (c) Choose any one hero from a history or tragedy by Shakespeare and try to show, from your knowledge of the play, how he was regarded by his friends, and by his enemies. What picture do you thus obtain of the character, and how far is it complete? (d) Make a critical analysis of the imagery used by Shakespeare in any one soliloquy or speech which you know well. For what purpose is the imagery used, and how effective is it in fulfilling Shakespeare’s intention?
2. (a) Discuss this statement with reference to four of the pilgrims who seem to you to have had different reasons for setting out to Canterbury. (b) Illustrate the truth of this statement from one lay character and from one church character in the Prologue to The Canterbury Tales. (c) Choose any one of The Canterbury Tales with which you are familiar and show how Chaucer has used it as a means of displaying humour or pathos or exciting narrative or descriptive power.
3. (a) Who is your favourite heroine in a novel by Scott, or Jane Austen, or Dickens, or Thackeray, or the Brontes, or Thomas Hardy, or Joyce Cary? State why she appeals to you. (b) Write a character sketch of one of the following: Mr. Collins, Lord Evandale, Mr. Micawber, Magwitch, Archdeacon Grantly, Archie Weir, Dr. Aziz, Jess Oakroyd, Lewis Eliot, David Mountolive.
4. Write a critical appreciation of a sonnet by Shakespeare, or Milton, or Wordsworth, or Keats.
5. (a) Illustrate the truth of this statement with reference to one essayist with whose work you are closely acquainted. (b) Choose any essayist whose work you have studied carefully and, by close reference to at least two of his essays, discuss his choice of subjects, his manner of treating them, any notable characteristics of his style, and the reasons for which his writings appeal to readers.
6. (a) From your reading of one of the poems named below, what do you gather of the poet’s personality, tastes, and attitude to life? (b) What light is thrown by any one of the following poems on the social, political and economic conditions of its age?
7. With reference to any Scottish poem, or group of poems (e.g. ballads), or to any Scottish novel, discuss the truth of this statement.
8. With reference to one lyric by Burns and one by Wordsworth, compare the attitudes of the two poets towards nature.
9. Basing your answer on the work of any eminent living novelist, discuss the truth of this statement.
10. Choose a play or a non-fiction prose work which deals with a controversial topic. How far does the author present his material effectively, and in what ways would he be likely to influence his audience or his readers?

LOWER GRADE
(1960)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. What contribution was made either by David I to Scottish History or by Henry II to English history?
2. Write notes on two of the following: archaeology and the study of Roman Britain; Northumbria in the 7th century; the Norsemen in Scotland; St. Francis of Assisi; William Wallace; medieval fairs and markets; James I of Scotland.
3. Give a brief character sketch of Henry VII. Describe his methods of government and his foreign policy.
4. What were the main social and economic problems of England in the sixteenth century?
5. Give an account of the religious conflict in Scotland during the reign of Mary Stewart (1542-1567).
6. How far was James VI and I a successful ruler in either Scotland or England?
7. Describe the part played by two of the following in the Civil Wars of 1642-1651: Prince Rupert; the Marquis of Montrose; Thomas Fairfax; David Leslie; Oliver Cromwell.
8. Do you agree that James VII and II deserved to lose his throne? Give reasons.
9. What were the main terms of the Act of Union of 1707? Show very briefly how it resulted from the Revolution Settlement of 1689 in Scotland.
10. Give a brief narrative of the Jacobite Rising of 1745. What measures did the government take to prevent another rising?
11. Give an account of the career of William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, and indicate his importance in British history.
12. Outline the part played by the British Navy in the French Wars 1793-1815.
13. Why have the “hungry forties” been so named? What reforms were passed by the Tory government of 1841-46?
14. Give an account of the work done by Gladstone in domestic reform (excluding Ireland).
15. What were the main terms of the Anglo-French Entente of 1904? Trace its effects on British foreign policy up to 1914.
16. Answer two of the following: (i) What was the importance of convicts in Australian history? (ii) What is meant by the White Australia policy and why has it arisen? (iii) What were the causes of discontent that led to the Indian Mutiny? (iv) What progress was made towards self-government in India between the end of World War I and the attainment of independence in 1947?
17. Write notes on two of the following: The Scottish linen industry in the eighteenth century; the Stamp Act; Lord Castlereagh; Robert Owen; the Oxford Movement or the Disruption in the Church of Scotland; Charles Stewart Parnell; the Parliament Act, 1911; Franklin D. Roosevelt.
18. (a) Is it true to say that there has been a Scottish Renaissance either in culture or in politics in the 20th century? Give reasons. (b) How is the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom chosen and what are his functions? (c) Trace and account for the influence of the United States on European affairs since 1945.

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
HISTORY
PAPER: 1
1. Why did the kings of Northumbria and Mercia fail to unite England and those of Wessex succeed?
2. Compare the importance of the reigns of Henry I and Henry II in the history of England.
3. Can you justify the view that the thirteenth century up to the death of Alexander III was a “golden age” in Scottish history?
4. With what countries and in what commodities did either Scotland or England do most of its trade in the fifteenth century?
5. Write notes on two of the following: the Roman walls; Christianity in Scotland before 597; Cnut; Magna Carta; the Legislation of Edward I; the Black Prince; Bishop Kennedy.
6. Why was the power of Henry VII so much greater than that of the Lancastrian and Yorkist kings?
7. Trace the chief steps in the Scottish Reformation from 1560 to 1592. Or Describe the dangers which threatened the Elizabethan settlement of the English Church, from Roman Catholics and from Puritans.
8. Is the stupidity of Charles I an adequate explanation of the troubles of 1629-42 in both Scotland and England?
9. Explain the foreign and domestic policy of Danby and account for his fall.
10. How far is this true of the revolution of 1688-9 in either Scotland or England?
11. Why were the Whigs in power throughout the reigns of George I and George II?
12. Was the American War of Independence caused more by political or by economic grievances?
13. On what grounds may the reign of William IV (1830-7) be called an era of reform?
14. Do you consider that Disraeli’s government was more beneficial in domestic or in foreign and colonial policy?
15. How far is it correct to call the foreign policy of Lord Salisbury one of “splendid isolation”? Why was it abandoned?
16. Trace briefly the main stages in the development of the trade union movement from the repeal of the Combination Acts (1824) to the passing of the Trade Disputes Act (1906).
17. In what ways was the settlement of Australia affected by geographical factors? Or How far is this a satisfactory description of the Indian Mutiny?
18. Write notes on two of the following: John Wesley; the foreign policy of Castlereagh; the Disruption of the Church of Scotland; General Charles Gordon; Charles Stewart Parnell; the Parliament Act (1911).

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
HISTORY
PAPER: 2
1. Describe life in Athens in the time of Pericles.
2. Explain the reasons for the rise and fall of Thebes in the fourth century.
3. Show the main events in the struggle between patricians and plebeians down to the passing of the Lex Hortensia.
4. Why did the Civil Wars break out in 49 B.C. and why did they end in the victory of Augustus?
5. Explain and compare the policies of Trajan and Hadrian.
6. Write notes on two of the following: Cleisthenes of Athens; the Persian campaign against Greece in 480; Spartan education; the organisation of Alexander’s empire; the Samnite Wars; Tiberius Gracchus.
7. On what grounds may the Franks be considered more important than the Goths?
8. What degree of success was achieved by the First Crusade? Why were the later Crusades less successful?
9. Compare the importance of Gregory VII and Innocent III in the history of the mediaeval church.
10. Do you consider that Philip II (Augustus) or Philip IV did the more for France?
11. What do you know of the Continental universities in the Middle Ages?
12. Write notes on two of the following: Hugh Capet; the Normans in Southern Italy and Sicily; St. Francis of Assisi; the Hanseatic League; the rise of the Swiss Confederation; Joan of Arc.
13. On what grounds may the rise of nation-states on the Continent of Europe be dated from the latter half of the fifteenth century?
14. Estimate the effects of the Reformation on Germany in the sixteenth century.
15. To what extent and for what reasons did the power of Spain threaten the rest of Europe in the reign of Philip II?
16. How far does Henry IV deserve the reputation of having been amongst the best of the French kings?
17. Trace and account for the growth in importance of Brandenburg-Prussia between the Peace of Westphalia (1648) and that of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748).
18. Write notes on two of the following: the Capture of Constantinople; Ivan the Terrible; Cardinal Mazarin; the religious policy of Louis XIV; the Peace of Utrecht; the Pragmatic Sanction of Charles VI.
19. Why did Joseph II fail as an enlightened despot?
20. What were the chief political and social defects of the ancien regime in France? How far were they remedied before the fall of the monarchy in 1792?
21. Compare the policy of Napoleon I towards Italy with that of Napoleon III.
22. Why may Germany be called a “satiated power” by 1871? What effect did this have on Bismarck’s later diplomacy?
23. Do you consider that the war of 1914-1918 would have broken out if the Sarajevo assassinations had not occurred?
24. Write notes on two of the following: Baron von Stein; the Zollverein; the Second French Republic; Giuseppe Garibaldi; the Austro-Hungarian Ausgleich; The Dreyfus Case.

LOWER GRADE
(1960)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. On the accompanying map of part of the British Isles: (a) Name the three towns lettered A, B, and C, and the three rivers marked with a cross, and insert the district names of the areas lettered D and E. (b) Mark with a cross and name the Peak District, the York Moors, the Lammermuirs, and the County of Durham. (c) Name the July isotherm marked on the map; estimate the mean July temperatures at G and H; state why the mean July temperature for G is nearer to the actual temperature than that shown for H. (d) On the railway from Glasgow to the south mark and name Beattock, Shap, Annan Valley, and Crewe; mark an area noted for dairy farming (D), an area noted for salt-mining (S), and an area noted for heavy industry (H).
2. On the accompanying map of the world: (a) Name the six capitals marked with a dot and beside each name the appropriate country; identify the Andes, Caucasus, the Karroos, and the Tarim Basin; name the rivers Ob, Mackenzie, Zambezi, and Orinoco. (b) Name the four ocean currents marked and state whether each is a warm or a cold current. (c) Beside each of the three stippled areas state the season of maximum rainfall, the warmest month, and the natural vegetation.
3. Study the contour map supplied and then answer the following: (a) Describe the relief and drainage and show to what extent they have influenced the route system of the area. (b) Comment on the distribution of factories. (c) Why did a port develop at A and not at F?
4. Describe the main features of the distribution of land and sea throughout the world and in your answer contrast the northern and southern hemispheres.
5. How would you recognise that a mountainous area had been glaciated? Consider features of both erosion and deposition.
6. What is meant by cyclonic rainfall, relief rainfall, and convectional rainfall? Select Java or the Western Ghats or southern Japan and give an explanatory account of the seasonal variation in its rainfall throughout the year.
7. On the map of the world provided for question 2 three areas A, B, and C are marked. State whether these are densely, moderately, or sparsely peopled and account for the density of each.
8. Account for the growth of either heavy industries in Lanarkshire and South Wales or woollen industries in the Borders and the West Riding of Yorkshire. In what ways do these examples of the same industry differ?
9. Describe the main imports of England and Wales from across the North Sea, the English Channel, and the Irish Sea. In each case name two of the main British ports. Or Write a geographical description of one of the following: The Pennines; the Fens; the mainland of Scotland north of the Caledonian Canal.
10. Name four of the large industrial areas of Europe, including at least one from European Russia. Select one of these and account for its main industries. Or Indicate the similarities and differences in site, position and importance of one of the following pairs of ports: Rotterdam and Bordeaux; Marseilles and Genoa; Copenhagen and Stockholm.
11. Describe the main features of the climate of two of the following: The Meseta of Spain; the Plain of Lombardy; the Steppes of Russia. For one of the areas selected show how its climate influences the main types of farming.
12. Write a geographical account of either the lumbering industry of Canada or the iron and steel industry of the United States.
13. Write a geographical description of the Prairies of Canada or the Valley of California or the Corn Belt of the United States.
14. Select one of the great rivers of monsoon Asia and write an explanatory account of the distribution of population within its basin.
15. Draw one or more sketch-maps of the basin of the Niger to show the zones of climate and vegetation through which it flows. Explain why the exploration of this river was so difficult.
16. Exactly where and of what importance are the Canterbury Plains, the Riverina, and the Northern Territory of Australia?
17. Describe the climate and agriculture of either the Argentine or Chile. In your answer bring out their relationships.

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 1
1. After studying the part of the Ordnance Survey map which is provided: (a) Describe the view northwards from Brandwood Moor and how it differs from the view to the north-west from Great Hamildon. (b) To what extent do valleys control the routes from Burnley via Accrington to Haslingden and from Burnley southwards; the sites and shapes of Padiham, Burnley and the urban grouping of Rawtenstall-Bacup? (c) What are the main uses made of the moorland?
2. On the accompanying map of the Arctic and adjacent lands: (a) Name the towns lettered A, B, and C, and the Rivers Volga, Ob, and Mackenzie, and mark with a cross the magnetic north pole. (b) Name the two isotherms marked on the map. (c) Estimate in degrees the distance of places X and Y from the North Pole. Beside each, print your estimates of their January and July temperatures. (d) Mark, with arrows to show direction, the winds blowing over British Columbia in July, over Norway in October, and over Manchuria in December. (e) Name the direction of flight along the routes of two aircraft marked with red arrows. (f) Along the course of the Trans-Siberian railway mark and name two industrial areas and the towns of Irkutsk and Novosibirsk.
3. Draw a sketch-map of an area approximately 100 square miles in size with your school centrally placed and show the following items: relief; drainage; latitude and longitude; height of school above mean sea level; direction of true north; approximate direction of magnetic north; either the extent of arable land or the main routes of the area. Give the scale and include a key.
4. What is the difference between a mountain range, a mountain system, and a high plateau? Give one example of each. Select one of your examples and discuss its significance in relation to routeways.
5. Why is it that eastern and western coasts of continents in similar latitudes experience very different climates?
6. Discuss the opportunities for development offered by equatorial forests and the difficulties to be faced in their development.
7. Compare and contrast the world importance of the Panama and Suez canals.
8. “The nomadic way of life, whether hunting or stock rearing, is disappearing.” Discuss with examples from Asia or Africa or North America.
9. Why is the southern hemisphere, in contrast with the northern hemisphere, so sparsely peopled except for a few isolated areas? Or Discuss with reference to any one of Canada, U.S.S.R., Brazil, or Indonesia the problems to be faced in organizing it into a political unit.

HIGHER GRADE
(1960)
GEOGRAPHY
PAPER: 2
1. Select a major Scottish industry and write a geographical description of it. Or Select one of the major agricultural areas of Great Britain and give an account of the types of farming found there.
2. Compare and contrast either the Highlands of Scotland east and west of their main watershed or north and south Wales.
3. In what ways do three of the following ports resemble and differ from each other as regards position and importance: Liverpool; London; Hull; Glasgow?
4. What are the main features of pastoral farming in Mediterranean lands and Switzerland? Bring out the importance of relief and climate and show how the practices of the two areas differ.
5. Show that the distribution of population in either Sweden or the Iberian Peninsula reflects the general geography of the area. Or Write a geographical essay on the importance of the sea and mountains in the life of the Norwegians.
6. Compare and contrast either the Rhone Corridor and the Rhine Rift Valley or Belgium and the Plain of Lombardy. Or Write a geographical description of either the Ruhr or the Donetz Basin.
7. With the aid of sketch-maps consider the advantages and disadvantages of site and the importance of New York, San Francisco, and New Orleans.
8. Write a geographical description of one of the following: The Canadian Shield, the Great Basin, the piedmont and coastal plain from New York to the northern boundary of Florida.
9. Why does the vast majority of the population of Canada live in the extreme south of the country? What possibilities are there for more intensive settlement farther north? Or Explain why more than half of the population of U.S.A. lives east of the Mississippi. Comment on the growth of population in California.
10. Comment on the position and importance of Karachi, Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras, and discuss the suitability of the port facilities available to Eastern Pakistan.
11. Show how the physical geography of one of the following areas has conditioned the life of its inhabitants: Tibet; Arabia; Irrawaddy Delta; Mesopotamia; the tundra of Siberia; the Red Basin of China.
12. Describe the distribution and development of either the oil resources of south-west Asia or the mineral resources of Siberia.
13. Describe and account for the parallelism seen in the vegetation zones of Africa north and south of the equator.
14. Write a geographical account of the export and import trade of New Zealand paying special attention to its world position. Or Relate rainfall and agriculture in Australia. What has been done to overcome water scarcity?
15. Where and what are the llanos, the campos, and the pampas? How do they differ in development and why?
